
 - CROWDSOURCING VICTORY: INSIDE THE CIVIL SOCIETY CAMPAIGN TO IMPROVE THE LETHALITY AND SURVIVABILITY OF THE UKRAINIAN MILITARY

[Joint House and Senate Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]



 


                               

 
CROWDSOURCING VICTORY: INSIDE THE CIVIL SOCIETY CAMPAIGN TO IMPROVE THE 
         LETHALITY AND SURVIVABILITY OF THE UKRAINIAN MILITARY

=======================================================================

                                HEARING

                               BEFORE THE

            COMMISSION ON SECURITY AND COOPERATION IN EUROPE

                        U.S. HELSINKI COMMISSION

                     U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

                    ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEETH CONGRESS

                             SECOND SESSION

                               __________

                            DECEMBER 7, 2022

                               __________

   Printed for the use of the Commission Security and Cooperation in 
                                 Europe

                             [CSCE 117-21]
                             
 [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]                            


                       Available via www.csce.gov
                       
                       
                              ______

             U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE 
 50-671               WASHINGTON : 2023
                       
                       
                       
            COMMISSION ON SECURITY AND COOPERATION IN EUROPE

                        U.S. HELSINKI COMMISSION

U.S SENATE

                                     U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

SENATOR BEN CARDIN, Maryland, 
    Chairman

ROGER F. WICKER, Mississippi,        STEVE COHEN, Tennessee, Co-
    Ranking Member                       Chairman
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL, Connecticut
JOHN BOOZMAN, Arkansas
TIM SCOTT, South Carolina
JEANNE SHAHEEN, New Hampshire
TINA SMITH, Minnesota
THOM TILLIS, North Carolina
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, Rhode Island

                                     JOE WILSON, South Carolina, 
                                         Ranking Member
                                     ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama
                                     EMANUEL CLEAVER II, Missouri
                                     BRIAN FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
                                     RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona
                                     RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
                                     GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
                                     MARC VEASEY, Texas

                            EXECUTIVE BRANCH
                 Department of State - to be appointed
                Department of Defense - to be appointed
                Department of Commerce - to be appointed
                         C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

                              ----------                              
                                                                   Page

                             COMMISSIONERS

Senator Ben Cardin, Chairman, from Maryland......................     1

Senator Roger F. Wicker, Ranking Member, from Mississippi........     3

Representative Joe Wilson, Ranking Member, from South Carolina...     3

Senator Jeanne Shaheen, from New Hampshire.......................     4

Senator Richard Blumenthal, from Connecticut.....................    10

Representative Ruben Gallego, from Arizona.......................    14


                               WITNESSES

Serhiy Prytula, Founder and Chairman of the Ukraine-based Prytula 
  Charity Foundation.............................................     5

Dora Chomiak, President of U.S.-based NGO Razom for Ukraine......     6

Taras Chmut, Director of the Ukraine-based foundation Come Back 
  Alive..........................................................     8

Jonas Ohman, Founder and Head of the Lithuania-based NGO Blue/
  Yellow for Ukraine.............................................     8

Rima Ziuraitiene, Managing Director, Blue/Yellow USA.............    18



CROWDSOURCING VICTORY: INSIDE THE CIVIL SOCIETY CAMPAIGN TO IMPROVE THE 
         LETHALITY AND SURVIVABILITY OF THE UKRAINIAN MILITARY

                              ----------                              

 COMMISSION ON SECURITY AND COOPERATION IN 
                                    EUROPE,
                          U.S. HELSINKI COMMISSION,
                                  HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,
                                       Wednesday, December 7, 2022.

    The Hearing Was Held From 2:31 p.m. To 3:39 p.m., Room 562, 
Dirksen Senate Office Building, Washington, D.C., Senator Ben 
Cardin [D-MD], Chairman, Commission for Security and 
Cooperation in Europe, presiding.
    Committee Members Present: Senator Ben Cardin [D-MD], 
Chairman; Senator Roger Wicker [R-MS], Ranking Member; 
Representative Joe Wilson [R-SC], Ranking Member; Senator 
Jeanne Shaheen [D-NH]; Senator Richard Blumenthal [D-CT]; and 
Representative Ruben Gallego. [D-AZ]
    Witnesses: Dora Chomiak, President of U.S.-based NGO Razom 
for Ukraine; Taras Chmut, Director of the Ukraine-based 
foundation Come Back Alive; Serhiy Prytula, Founder and 
Chairman of the Ukraine-based Prytula Charity Foundation; Jonas 
Ohman, Founder and Head of the Lithuania-based NGO Blue/Yellow 
for Ukraine; and Rima Ziuraitiene, Managing Director, Blue/
Yellow USA.

 OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BEN CARDIN, CHAIRMAN, U.S. SENATOR 
                         FROM MARYLAND

    Chairman Cardin: If I could have everyone's attention, 
please, we are going to get started. I want to welcome everyone 
to the Helsinki Commission hearing. By way of explanation, do 
we always start exactly on time? Well, not always. But today we 
are. The reason, quite frankly, is that Senator Wicker and I, 
and the Senate members, are going to excuse ourselves and 
Congressman Wilson is going to practice being Chairman of the 
Committee, because in a few days the Chairmanship will rotate 
to the United States House of Representatives. The reason we 
are excusing ourselves is that we have an all-senators 
classified briefing on Ukraine and Russia, including the 
secretary of state, and the secretary of defense, and our 
national director of intelligence. So it is a critically 
important meeting for us to be at, furthering the cause of this 
particular hearing today.
    I also want to acknowledge that this will be our last 
hearing in this ,Congress anticipated on Ukraine. We have had a 
series of hearings on Ukraine. We have talked about the 
military aspects, the humanitarian aspects, and the immigrants. 
We have talked about holding accountable those who have 
perpetrated this, the Russians, Mr. Putin, for war crimes, for 
genocide. We have had a series of hearings, which is the 
appropriate role for the Helsinki Commission. I just really 
want to acknowledge the incredible cooperation this Commission 
has had from its leadership.
    I want to acknowledge Senator Wicker for his passion and 
leadership on these issues. He has worked tirelessly, 
internationally as well as here in the United States. 
Congressman Wilson has been a true partner, and I thank him 
very much for his support during my Chairmanship. I hope to 
reciprocate in the next two years. I also would like to 
acknowledge Representative Cohen for his leadership on the 
Commission. This is a nonpartisan, bipartisan commission that 
has focused on the issues. No issue has been more important to 
us than standing up to the atrocities committed by Mr. Putin 
and Russia in this unprovoked attack on a sovereign nation.
    This has been our priority. I also want to acknowledge the 
staff work that is done by the Helsinki Commission. We have 
just an incredible staff that does yeoman's work. We do not 
have a large staff, but we have a very experienced staff that 
has done great work, including arranging for such a 
distinguished group of people to be before us. I say that 
because the fight in Ukraine is a fight that we all are engaged 
in, for many reasons. One is the unprovoked attack on a 
sovereign nation. We should stand behind Ukraine in that 
regard. Secondly, they are the front line of defense on 
democratic states. We know that Mr. Putin's desire goes well 
beyond Ukraine to other countries in the region, other 
sovereign countries in the region, and to bring down democratic 
states.
    This is a fight that we all need to be engaged in. Yes, we 
may have some differences as to the types of equipment that we 
are making available, but we are committed to working with our 
international partners to make sure Ukraine has the defensive 
weapons it needs to defend itself. We also are committed to 
helping in regards to the humanitarian crisis, including those 
who have been displaced as a result of the war. I can tell you, 
this commission will stay singularly focused for holding 
accountable the perpetrators of these atrocities for the 
damages they caused and the criminal activities that they have 
participated in.
    We will stick with this issue. Today, I must tell you, from 
the beginning we have been just amazed on the incredible 
talent, commitment, energy, spirit of the Ukrainian people. It 
is hard just to describe how impressive your leaders and the 
Ukrainian peoples themselves have been in standing up to a much 
larger country, and military, and Mr. Putin. You have conducted 
your defense with dignity and respect for life, and that is 
what we expect from a democratic state. So we admire greatly 
all your work.
    Today's hearing on talking about how the non-military 
engagements have been involved in military operations, how you 
have been able to supplement the formal military establishment 
of Ukraine. With very little outside donations and support, how 
you have been able to mobilize the country to defend itself, 
mobilizing the people of Ukraine, giving them the capacity to 
defend their own country. We have some very, very distinguished 
guests. I am going to recognize first Senator Wicker, because 
the two of us need to leave shortly. Then I will proudly turn 
the gavel over, not permanently because there is still one more 
hearing to go--[laughter]--to Congressman Wilson.
    Senator Wicker.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ROGER F. WICKER, RANKING MEMBER, U.S. 
                    SENATOR FROM MISSISSIPPI

    Co-Chairman Wicker: Thank you very much, Senator Cardin. I 
adopt and endorse as my own every single word that Senator 
Cardin said in his opening statement. Mine will be much 
briefer, to make an extra point. We are honored to have this 
distinguished panel. Ukraine must win this war. If they do not, 
malign actors around the world will only be emboldened. The 
United States needs to ensure that we are not creating 
unnecessary red tape or being in the way, somehow hampering the 
victory of the Ukrainian people.
    Let me take a personal note, a note of personal privilege, 
in remembering that in October, two distinguished professors 
from my state and from Mississippi State University, Dr. 
Banerjee and Dr. Tkach published an article in Foreign Affairs 
highlighting how red tamp is hindering our partners from being 
able to produce and obtain the equipment they need for the 
battlefield. For example, the State Department's International 
Traffic in Arms Relations, better known as ITAR, is critical to 
protecting our national security. Yet, it is currently 
preventing our allies from producing certain weapons for 
Ukraine. These regulations need to be updated so that they can 
serve our interests better.
    Providing these weapons could have an immediate impact on 
the war in Ukraine as winter sets in. Ukrainians have shown 
they are fully motivated to win and to finance it however they 
can, including through crowdsourcing. They need more tanks, 
armored personnel carriers, and long-range missiles. But they 
also need body armor, winter uniforms, vehicles, medical 
supplies, and drones to keep the defense going. This is an area 
where your organizations have been decisive, and where anyone 
willing to donate can make a difference.
    I greet our distinguished panel, thank them for their 
sacrifice and the information they will provide to us. We need 
to do more to stand with Ukraine. We need to do more as a 
country and as an OSCE. We need to get them every piece of 
equipment they need. The goal is not a stalemate. It is not a 
temporary armistice. It is victory. Anything less than a return 
to Ukraine's sovereign borders will give Russia time to regroup 
and return to battle. I am confident that with strong volunteer 
support, Ukraine will win the victory.
    Thank you, Mr. Chair.
    Chairman Cardin: With that, I will turn the gavel over to 
Congressman Wilson.

STATEMENT OF JOE WILSON, RANKING MEMBER, U.S. HOUSE FROM SOUTH 
                            CAROLINA

    Representative Wilson: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, 
Senator Ben Cardin, and actually for everyone here. You are 
seeing something that is really remarkable, and that is with 
the leadership of Senator Cardin, this really has been a 
bipartisan Commission. There has never been really an issue I 
have seen where Republicans and Democrats have come together in 
such strength and purpose to support the people of Ukraine for 
victory. With that, I want to thank you for holding the hearing 
today.
    Additionally, it is no surprise Senator Wicker is correct, 
and that is that we are talking about crowdsourcing victory. 
Not stalemate. Not armistice. Not negotiations that we know the 
other--war criminal Putin is just simply not going to follow 
through. There is no agreement that they have lived up to. So 
why should this be now? Thank you--both Senators for your words 
of wisdom.
    With what I believe that we are in, the world is in a 
crucial competition between democracies who live by rule of law 
and we are opposed to autocrats who rule by power of gun. 
Ukraine is currently the main target, as we can see. Success by 
victory will deter the Chinese Communist Party from any efforts 
to conduct mass murder in Taiwan. Additionally, the success of 
Ukraine is very important.
    The other axis of evil, Tehran, has ever intent to fulfill 
death to Israel, death to America. Instead of land acquisition, 
it is particularly gruesome, Tehran wants to vaporize the 
people of Israel. This is why it is so crucial to me and to 
most of us, including Senator Shaheen, too, that we would be 
working together for the people of Ukraine.
    Putin's invasion, it is really now into the ninth month, 
but Ukraine remains strong and has demonstrated that it can and 
will liberate all of its territory. Indeed, we must support 
Ukraine in the goal of complete liberation, a return to the 
1991 sovereign borders of Ukraine. Anything less would be a 
respite for Russia to regroup and conduct more mass murder 
again. I want to thank so much and was so grateful for the 
dedicated witnesses who are appearing today.
    Your work is a testament to the republican virtue and 
everything that is best about free societies. The ability of 
Ukraine to self-organize and get much-needed equipment to the 
front is among the most extraordinary aspects of the Ukrainian 
defense effort. I want to understand how we can facilitate your 
jobs and help to accomplish your mission. The voluntary effort 
to get Ukrainian forces body armor, optics, drones, and so much 
other equipment is an example for the world.
    We can see that Putin tragically is sacrificing young 
Russians for his personal gain of oil, money, and power. With 
this, we also want to recognize the distinguished guest we have 
the audience. We have the deputy minister for infrastructure of 
Ukraine, Oleksandra Azarkhina. Additionally, we have Ukrainian 
MP Oleksiy Goncharenko. We have Rip Rawlings, who heads 
Ripley's Heroes and is helping to get much-needed supplies to 
Ukrainian forces. Sarah Ashton-Cirillo, who has been reporting 
from the front.
    With that, I yield back and--actually, yield to Senator 
Shaheen.

  STATEMENT OF JEANNE SHANEEN, U.S. SENATE FROM NEW HAMPSHIRE

    Senator Shaneen: Thank you, Congressman. I do not have an 
opening statement other than to thank the witnesses. Because I 
have to leave for the briefing, hopefully we can hear from as 
many of them as possible before I have to leave. Thank you all.
    Representative Wilson: Thank you very much. With that, we 
will begin with our witnesses. We will begin left to right. At 
this time if you could introduce yourself, we are very grateful 
to have with us the Serhiy Prytula. Please pronounce your name 
correctly, so the world knows, Okay? Because, hey, we are proud 
of you being here.

   STATEMENT OF SERHIY PRYTULA, FOUNDER AND CHAIRMAN OF THE 
            UKRAINE-BASED PRYTULA CHARITY FOUNDATION

    Ms. Prytula: That is usually the case, no worries. Dear 
Congressmen, dear ladies and gentlemen, my name is Serhiy 
Prytula. I am the founder of the Prytula Charity Foundation. It 
is a great honor to speak to you here in the United States 
Congress. My colleagues and I represent the Ukrainian volunteer 
community, which is an inherent part of Ukrainian civil 
society. To speak truthfully, it is hard to divide our 
societies into civil and military during the war. It is better 
to call them people who defend our state with weapons and 
people who bring them the bullets.
    Since February 2022, our foundation has raised more than 
$85 million for the needs of Ukrainian Army. We delivered more 
than 3,000 drones, including three Bayraktars too; 11,000 
communication systems; 850 vehicles, including armored ones. We 
also bought a satellite and access to the database of the 
entire constellation of satellites. It would be impossible 
without the true trust and support of millions of Ukrainians, 
no matter in Ukraine or abroad.
    We are not alone in this fight. On behalf of Ukrainian 
people, I am grateful to the people of the United States of 
America, thousands of men and women who stand with us, consult, 
train, volunteer, and listen to us. The values we share as 
nations, will for freedom, the rule of law, and the value of 
human life are not just words, but imperatives worth fighting 
for. We also are grateful for the military supplies that play a 
key role in our advantage on the battlefield.
    Do we need more weapon? Yes, we do. We need more effective 
weapons to advance and save the lives of our people. It will be 
more effective to help us win this war as soon as possible. It 
is much cheaper to help Ukraine win this war now than to spend 
more money later on fighting Russian aggression in Poland or 
Lithuania. It should be clear for everyone that Russia will not 
stop in Ukraine.
    The next step for all of us is to ensure justice. Russian 
war crimes should be investigated. Their executors, from 
decisionmakers in Kremlin to the war criminals in the trenches, 
should be punished. Russia should be recognized as a state 
sponsor of terrorism and excluded from the United Nation 
Security Council. Bringing justice to those who suffered at the 
hands of Russians is essential for the safety of our future.
    Please know that Ukraine's volunteer community and civil 
society are your strategic partners. After the victory, we will 
not disappear or lose momentum. We will keep balancing the 
government, ensuring that our country develop democratically, 
and that the deep relationship and cooperation between Ukraine 
and the United States of America continue into the future. 
Again, let me thank you for your support of Ukraine, your 
strong belief in our nation and our victory. We are invincible 
when united. Thank you.
    Representative Wilson: Thank you very much, Director, for 
your service. We appreciate so much Come Back Alive. That is so 
impressive, $85 million raised. That is incredible, by any 
standards. We are--thank you for your success. We now have as 
the president of the U.S.-based nongovernment organization, 
Razom for Ukraine, Dora Chomiak.

    STATEMENT OF DORA CHOMIAK, PRESIDENT OF THE U.S.-BASED 
         NONGOVERNMENT ORGANIZATION, RAZOM FOR UKRAINE

    Ms. Chomiak: Yes. Ranking Member Wilson, Senator Shaheen, 
and to all the distinguished members of the Commission, it is a 
special privilege to speak with you today, since you and your 
staff have been at the forefront of the effort to see democracy 
succeed in Ukraine. Personally, for me, it is extra special 
because a few lifetimes ago I was an intern at the Commission 
as a high school student at McLean High School. It is nice to 
come full circle.
    My name is Dora Chomiak. I am the president of Razom. In 
Ukrainian, that means ``together.'' We are an American--
Ukrainian organization that grew out of the 2014 revolution of 
dignity. We are not a political party. We are not a business. 
We are squarely in the civil society sector. Our mission is to 
help build a more prosperous and democratic Ukraine. We do this 
by unlocking the potential that is in Ukraine.
    Looking at the focus of today's hearing, I would like to 
underscore the word ``Victory'' in the title. It is an apt word 
choice. The goal for the United States, the goal for Ukraine, 
and the goal for Razom is victory. We should not be shy about 
this. First, it is my belief that the United States, including 
Congress, must do everything in its power to make support 
available and accessible to Ukraine. Second, this is not only a 
sound policy, but--and I see this in my work every single day--
the American people want Ukraine to prevail.
    Indeed, Americans, from 433 of the 435 Congressional 
Districts, have already donated to Razom. We have many examples 
of individuals asking their friends or family to forego giving 
a Christmas gift or a birthday gift this year, and instead of 
using that money to send emergency medical supplies or warm 
winter clothing to Ukraine. Donations come from organizations 
too, such as the Construction Workers Unions and Jewish 
Community Groups and Temples. In North Little Rock, Arkansas, 
parishioners of the Lakewood United Methodist Church from the 
Bob Millett Bible Class took it upon themselves to raise money 
for Ukraine, and donated it to Razom. We have received 
donations from workers at a terminal at JFK airport, from the 
Jewish Federation of Greater Washington, personal favorite, the 
Obec Brewing Company in Seattle, Washington, and many others.
    Razom is providing critical humanitarian war relief and 
recovery to address the most urgent needs as they evolve. We 
have built an end-to-end procurement and delivery system that 
places all aids into the hands of people in Ukraine very close 
to the front lines. We believe tactical medical supplies, like 
individual first aid kits, medic backpacks, tourniquets, 
hospital equipment, would vacuum assistant closure devices, and 
communications equipment like two-way radios, satellite phones, 
and quadcopters, that are used by first responders. People in 
Ukraine demonstrate immense resilience and determination each 
day. We, Americans, partner with them to defend democracy and 
rule of law for all of us together.
    I would like to share a story from one of our grant 
recipients. His name is Mykola Minaev. I met him on video 
earlier this year. He was sitting in his gamer chair with the 
red racing stripes on either side. Until February 24th, Mykola 
ran a taxi company in the city of Kharkiv. Since then, once he 
evacuated a bunch of people, he is pivoted his taxi company 
into an aid group. They have moved 5,000 families away from the 
fighting in the very early days of the war.
    They set up a sustainable food delivery system for those 
still in harm's way. Razom gave him a grant so he could 
purchase over 100 tons of food and 20,000 liters of fuel to 
sustain the assembly and delivery of 15,000 food aid kits per 
month. This is just one example of the drive, the ingenuity, 
the creativity of Ukrainians to solve problems. But for Mykola 
to keep helping people, he needs security. He needs something 
to protect him from the mines and the missiles. He needs funds 
for fuel and food. He needs our partnership.
    I want to finish by sharing a story about the last time I 
was here in Washington, and what it means to work together. 
Three months ago I was here on the Hill and I saw a friend who 
I had met a few years ago. She is a Ukrainian soldier and an 
activist. Her name is Andriana. She had left the front lines to 
spend a couple days in D.C. to help explain what is happening 
in Ukraine, and to advocate for armored vehicles, and saying it 
is hard to win the war riding in Mitsubishis and Toyotas. We 
had a great impromptu reunion in front of the Rayburn Building. 
I brought you a picture of her with my mom. That is Andriana, 
my mom, a little impromptu meeting on the Hill. This is for 
everyone behind me.
    Nine days ago, she was on a call with our team explaining 
that the units in her region were still relying on civilian 
vehicles and lacking in defense armor. Seven days ago, on my 
phone in our Razom leadership chat, I got a note that her car 
was hit and it was not clear if she was going to make it. My 
colleague, co-founder of Razom, Lubya Shipovich, was going to 
be joining us here today. Instead, she is in the hospital with 
Andriana. I do not want any more of my team, my colleagues, or 
my friends to wind up in hospitals. I know the American people 
support Ukrainian victory. Together, we Americans are 
crowdsourcing to support that victory. The question is, will 
Congress authorize the aid Ukraine needs? Will the U.S. provide 
the aid in time? I look forward to your questions. Thank you 
very much.
    Representative Wilson: Thank you, Ms. Chomiak. Indeed, it 
is so refreshing to have the alumni of this organization be so 
successful. Also, you are a living example of Ukrainian 
Americans making such a difference, and it is exciting.
    I want to correct for the record that, indeed, Serhiy 
Prytula is the founder and chairman of the Ukraine-based 
Prytula Charity Foundation. Congratulations on your success. I 
am going to restate it, $85 million. Congratulations. It is so 
meaningful for the people of Ukraine.
    At this time, indeed, we have Taras Chmut. I was grateful 
to be with Taras yesterday. What an inspiring individual. He is 
the director of the Ukraine-based Come Back Alive.

 STATEMENT OF TARAS CHMUT, DIRECTOR OF THE UKRAINE-BASED COME 
                           BACK ALIVE

    Mr. Chmut: Greetings. To start off, I would like to thank 
the entire American people for their ongoing long-term support 
to Ukraine. I am also grateful to Helsinki Commission for 
inviting me and for addressing the important issues of how to 
increase the effectiveness of assistance provision to Ukraine. 
My name is Taras Chmut. I am a Marine and a war veteran. I 
manage the Come Back Alive Foundation. We have been operating 
since 2014 as a public and a political organization. Since the 
start of our work, the foundation has raised over $250 million 
U.S. Our goal is comprehensive support and provision to Ukraine 
Defense Force with technical means to achieve superiority on 
the battlefield. Including night and thermal visions, drones, 
communication devices, vehicles, and thousands of other items. 
We are modernizing air defense systems and repairing U.S. 
Humvees.
    We are the first one in Ukraine to obtain a license to buy 
military goods. In May this year, we bought a Turkish 
Bayraktar, the UAV combat system. Everything we are doing is in 
response to the terrible war that take dozens if not hundreds 
of lives daily. Equipment and weapons are continuously lost in 
the war. There is--there is a need to equip our military. We 
must make up for those losses and replenish equipment, as long 
as defenders of Ukraine continue to fight. That included 
Americans who joined this war as volunteers. Since the 
beginning of the full-scale Russian invasions Come Back Alive 
has built up collaboration with U.S.-based organizations that 
procure and supply our logistical network with thousands of 
bulletproof vests, helmets, first aid kits, and other 
essentials that have been in critical needs.
    That is why I would like to say it is very important for 
the United States to remove Ukraine from the crime control 
columns of the Commerce control list. That will allow us to 
deliver critically needed equipment, such as holographic weapon 
sights, quickly, efficiently and effective. Thank you.
    Representative Wilson: Thank you very much, Director Chmut.
    We will now proceed. It is so significant, Jonas Ohman, who 
is the founder and head of the Lithuania-based nongovernmental 
organization Blue/Yellow for Ukraine. We welcome you here 
today. Lithuania has just been a beacon and a hallmark 
supporting the people of Ukraine.

  STATEMENT OF JONAS OHMAN, FOUNDER AND HEAD OF THE LITHUANIA-
   BASED NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATION BLUE/YELLOW FOR UKRAINE

    Mr. Ohman: First, I would like to thank the Helsinki 
Committee and more generally the U.S. Congress, its members and 
its staff, for providing us and our fellow panelists with this 
opportunity to discuss the significant contribution of civil 
society to Ukraine's success in Russia's war on Ukraine. 
Briefly about our organization: Blue/Yellow, which is a 
Lithuanian-U.S. organization active since 2014, we have 
gathered approximately $40 million U.S., mainly but not only 
from Lithuanian society. We are providing on a daily basis a 
wide range of nonlethal military, including dual use equipment. 
I can give you one example, Lithuanian anti-drone equipment 
that is being used as we speak on the frontline, all along it, 
in Donbas area. Also, it should be said, we are a non-Ukrainian 
organization based in Lithuanian, which is indeed a unique 
country when it comes to fighting for freedom.
    The role of civil society during the Russian aggression 
against Ukraine is one of the future legends of the defenses 
and victory of the country. The civil society, of which I and 
my fellow partners are friends and are a proud and active part, 
throughout almost nine years of war and hostilities contributed 
to supply, improvement, and developed a wide range of defensive 
capacities to and for the armed forces of Ukraine. At times, 
this support has been of utmost importance for solving of 
critical challenges. We have done this, importantly, not as a 
part of the formal state mechanisms, but rather as an informal 
extension of them. From the perspective of the enemy featuring 
the so-called hybrid warfare concept, we could be defined as 
counter-hybrids.
    The work, as described in the written statements by me and 
also by my partner in the U.S.--Jonas Ziuraitis, head of the 
USA--has a similar goal as the support provided on a 
governmental and international level. However, there are a few 
features making our support stand out, creating the unique 
brand of civil society support of armed forces of Ukraine. 
First of all, the support is raised from the public. This means 
that there is a continuous need for transparency and 
accountability. Without it, the donations would stop. With it, 
it is possible to further increase the volume and reach new 
levels of support, which has been proved several times by 
various civil society organizations with this war by procuring 
extremely high-end equipment.
    Secondly, the approach to the support provided is always 
less is more. With limited funds available, it is paramount to 
think hard about what to provide to whom and what quantities. 
The need for continuous optimal solutions creates over time a 
complex skillset for decision making.
    Thirdly, to achieve this, one needs a close understanding 
of the realities on the ground in the battlefield. This takes a 
decentralized approach, where close and continuous 
relationships with separate units, their commanders and other 
members, sets the foundation for the support decisions.
    Fourth, in order to achieve desired effect in the theater 
with small means, speed and agility are of utmost importance. 
The mindset of civil society support must be set to fast and 
accurate. To reiterate a famous U.S. Commander General Douglas 
MacArthur--loss of a battle can often be summarized in two 
words: too late. Civil society and its efforts try to beat that 
factor continuously, often with excellent results.
    All these factors create together the base for what I call 
the concept of support warfare with actors as civil society 
standing right behind the fighting forces ready willing and 
able to provide instant and accurate support for achieving of 
success in the battlefield. I see this hearing in the U.S. 
Congress primarily as an example of our way to do things--
providing civil society an opportunity to better explain who we 
are, what we do, how we do it, and why.
    I also see it as an opportunity to provide ideas for what I 
would like to call best practices for support in war time. It 
is not by accident our organization has been provided--we have 
a torch as our call sign. It means follow us.
    I give you one example as an advice. Anybody who is 
supporting the aggressor actively should be held accountable as 
proposed, by instance, in the Resolution on Council of Europe 
Parliamentary Assembly, voted on unanimously, parliamentary 
legislation, 46 countries.
    Once again, I thank the Helsinki Committee for the 
opportunity. I invite you all to listen to us to get a more 
profound idea of our methods and achievements in order to 
further develop and improve the defense of Ukraine, the Western 
world and its foundation of freedom and dignity.
    Slava Ukraini! [Glory To Ukaine]
    Audience members: Heroyam slava! [Glory To The Heroes]
    Representative Wilson: Founder Ohman, thank you so much for 
your testimony, and again, Lithuania, the other Baltic 
Republics--Latvia, Estonia--have just been so supportive of the 
people of Ukraine. It is so inspiring to see the Baltic 
republics so successful, too, economically. What a message to 
people across the Narva River--that the phenomenal success of 
the Baltics, if they were to change course in the Russian 
Federation, things would be better.
    With that in mind, I am really grateful that we have been 
joined by Senator Richard Blumenthal from the great state of 
Connecticut, and if you would like to make a statement, please, 
Senator.

 STATEMENT OF RICHARD BLUMENTHAL, U.S. SENATOR FROM CONNECTICUT

    Senator Blumenthal: I would just like to thank all of you 
for being here today. We have a briefing ongoing which I am 
going to have to join, but I am passionately committed to the 
cause that you represent here and in fact, will be making, I 
hope, a third trip to Ukraine. I have been twice this year.
    I am supporting an additional supplemental. The 
President's--at least--amount of about $38 billion, but also 
the kinds of reforms and values and principles that you 
represent and reflect here today. Thanks to every one of you 
for your courage and your commitment, and thank you, 
Congressman, for giving me this chance to say a few words.
    Representative Wilson: Thank you very much, Senator, and 
again, we could all tell you that the Congress is bipartisan of 
both political parties, supportive of you. But you actually get 
to see it, and so it is more than just a statement.
    What an unintended consequence of a war criminal Putin to 
have unity here in Congress, to have unity with NATO, but even 
more extraordinary, the thought that Sweden would give up 200 
years of neutrality to become part of NATO that Putin who 
claimed to be concerned about having NATO on the doorstep is 
going to have to welcome Finland--830 miles of--which is not 
threatening. He may claim it, but it is not. It is providing 
security.
    Then to see also the unity of the European Union. I am 
really grateful. I am the founding Co-Chair, Senator, and 
colleagues of the EU Caucus, and again, bipartisan working with 
Congressman Byrne--Brendan Byrne of Philadelphia.
    It was announced a couple of--about two months ago that the 
EU is providing $3 billion worth of military equipment to 
Ukraine. I got with Brendan, and I said, hey, did you know that 
the EU had military equipment. He said, no, and I said I did 
not either. [Laughter.]
    Well, hey, I have subsequently found out what that meant 
was they financed it from other countries, but, hey--
[laughter]--hey, however it gets there, we ask no questions. 
[Laughter.]
    Again, I want to thank each of you, and just--it is 
heartfelt from the people of America. Your success is truly, as 
I indicated, a worldwide conflict between democracies, rule of 
law, against autocrats who are seeking power by gun.
    With that, I am happy to defer any questions, Sir, and if 
you have questions before you run?
    Senator Blumenthal: I just want to second what you said 
about bipartisan cooperation--very, very important. Again, 
thank you.
    Representative Wilson: Thank you very much, Senator.
    We will now proceed into questions, and indeed, this 
afternoon the Senate has classified briefings very 
appropriately on Ukraine. Then, you should be aware that the 
House members are voting on the National Defense Authorization 
Act today, and I am really grateful that I am on the Armed 
Services Committee.
    There are multiple references to America's support for the 
people of Ukraine in the National Defense Authorization Act. 
Additionally, we are working in every way to replenish our 
stocks of equipment, to back up our NATO allies, our EU allies, 
so that they can also work together to provide equipment to the 
people of Ukraine.
    This really is a historic day, and another indication of we 
can tell you we are with you, that is nice. But look at what is 
being done--the classified briefing, the National Defense 
Authorization Act--and I hope--and I am confident that 
information will be provided to you as to the multiple 
references of how important Ukraine is and victory for 
Ukraine--not a negotiated armistice.
    With this in mind, beginning with Founder Prytula, if we 
could answer several questions. The first is, your respective 
organizations have described a gamut of assistance ranging from 
winter weather gear and medical equipment to communications and 
tactical gear. Is there a division of labor between your 
organizations? How do you coordinate among yourselves?
    Beginning with Founder Prytula.
    Interpreter: Could you please repeat the last sentence of 
your question? You said that they made a transfer from 
medical--
    Represenattive Wilson: How do they coordinate--the 
different organizations, how--how do the different 
organizations coordinate?
    Interpreter: [Off mic.]
    Ms. Prytula: Thank you, Senator. As we have good 
communication with other foundations in Ukraine, exactly you 
can see here Dora Chomiak and Taras Chmut, and we have 
communication with Razom and with Come Back Alive.
    Not only with Razom, we start to communicate after full-
scale invasion with Come Back Alive. We start to communicate a 
few years before this big invasion, and we also have 
communication with other foundations in Ukraine and with some 
people from Ukrainian volunteer community.
    Of course I am talking about big foundations because it is 
more simpler for us to check our supplies--everything that we 
are buying, brought--and we check which battalions or brigades 
get some help from Come Back Alive. After that we do not send 
our items to this brigade.
    Also we communicate with our Ministry of Defence also. That 
is why we help our civility to speak with our Minister of 
Defence Oleksii Reznikov, and we also communicated with him 
about needs of different units. After that we decided what we 
need to buy for our military.
    Representative Wilson: Thank you very much, and Ms. 
Chomiak?
    Ms. Chomiak: If I could build on what Serhiy has said, 
looking--the system may--of crowdsourcing, both the funding and 
the distribution, may look chaotic and inefficient from afar, 
but it is precisely one of its strengths.
    If we think back to the Revolution of Dignity at the end of 
2013, the beginning of 2014, you may remember those pictures of 
the center of KU with all these people standing at rock 
concerts, and people warming themselves by the fire. You sort 
of think, how on Earth is this working, right? My MBA 
operations management head was sort of exploding.
    If we look at it more closely, it is precisely these 
redundancies in services and this immediate collaboration, and 
people coming together, getting something done, moving onto the 
next thing, and then regrouping again. That is what is 
happening here, and I think this is one of the sources of 
resilience, effectiveness and efficiency.
    Exactly as Serhiy said, we know each other. We communicate 
with each other, and each day is an iteration. In the beginning 
it was each hour--every half hour was iteration--how do we get 
better and better at what we do?
    At Razom, among the things we have done is--you know, it is 
Ukraine with an insane level of education and a strong tech 
center. So, of course, we built some software.
    We have a software system that allows us to keep track--
from procurement, through assigning, through delivery, through 
final, and loop back--that allows us to understand who is using 
what, how--who is reporting on how it is being used and so 
forth. Then being able to share that with other organizations.
    Certainly I would encourage people to--it is almost like an 
ant hill. Everyone's moving, but--it may look confusing from 
outside, but when you speak with people who are actually 
receiving this aid and who are using it, it is an iterative 
process that keeps getting better and better.
    That is why autocracies that are trying to function top-
down are not succeeding, and they are not succeeding in Ukraine 
because of this resilience, innovation, individual freedom, and 
determination.
    Representative Wilson: Thank you so much, Ms. Chomiak.
    Mr.--Founder Chmut--Director Chmut?
    Interpreter: So did you ask the question, sir?
    Representative Wilson: Again, the coordination between 
organizations.
    Mr. Chmut: Thank you. Thank you, sir.
    [Continues through interpreter.] Our foundation has been 
active since 2014. [Comes on mic.] Our foundation has been 
active since 2014. In the course of these years, we have been 
able to build up an effective system of logistics and 
interaction with Ukraine's military.
    What we do is closely coordinated with commander in chief 
of Ukraine's military General Zaluzhnyi, the commanders of 
logistics of the military, those who are directly responsible 
for supplies for the military. We do not try to substitute the 
state.
    Our aspiration is to give more strength to the state where 
it is needed. Or sometimes we help the state, the government, 
to gain time that they may need to find--to gain more 
resources.
    We also want to reinforce and amplify the assistance that 
comes from Western governments, and we also help adjusting it 
to the realities of the war in Ukraine. This is what helps--has 
helped us to work competently and effectively in the course of 
all these years.
    Representative Wilson: Congratulations, Director. That is 
tremendous.
    Founder Ohman?
    Mr. Ohman: As a non-Ukrainian organization, I dare to say, 
we work a little differently. Needless to say, we are in touch 
with other organizations on specific issues, and sometimes we 
cooperate.
    However, we have chosen a somewhat different approach. We 
try and identify the fighters. We are talking mainly battalion 
level. We said that would be a very good level to go in there, 
actually to identify good commanders, good fighters.
    We identify the needs of these units. I can give you one 
example. During the Kherson offensive, we were following very 
closely behind a couple of the advancing units, asking them on 
a daily basis for specific needs--what they needed.
    I can give you one example. For artillery correction, a 
little better drones--RTK 300, which were used day and night 
for the--for instance, by working with the 777 systems provided 
by the United States.
    We also have a couple of unique capacities that we provide 
to anybody who asks for it. From Lithuania, for instance, anti-
drone systems with a unique potential, and also thermal vision, 
et cetera--said that we can provide and we can even get the 
licenses from the Lithuanian Government, which we are 
cooperating intimately.
    That said, as already mentioned before, this civil society 
movement--obviously we are all--everybody--we, more or less, 
know each other. The social element of it--that we are in 
touch, we know each other, or we know who know's somebody. This 
has turned out to be a crucial part of this endeavor.
    You can always get in touch with who you would like to 
actually get things done. The informal aspect of the civil 
society movement in Ukraine, supporting Ukraine, the Ukrainian 
Armed Forces cannot be underestimated.
    Yes, we can be formal as well, but especially these 
personal initiatives--and sometimes providing extremely 
interesting results. Again, we definitely--sorry, I forgot one 
thing I want to mention also. We do at the same time critically 
perceive the support provided from the West.
    We feel that we have kind of like a moral obligation to 
tell and try to communicate when we see, for instance, how 
support is not provided as fast and as accurate as it could. We 
are--we have been addressing this, for instance, with D.C. a 
couple of times. I am not saying that it is not working, but it 
is too slow. That is something that has to be considered.
    Thank you very much.
    Representative Wilson: Thank you very much. Indeed, 
logistics has been revolutionized substantially for people at 
home by using a barcode, and so now you can identify items that 
you have by inventory.
    Items can be specifically identified in the remotest areas, 
and then provided, again, to the remotest area through the 
barcode that we are so familiar with at the grocery store or 
drug store. That enables a complete logistics assessment that 
makes what you are doing is so helpful, and so meaningful.
    Now we have been joined--again, a living example of 
Republicans and Democrats working together in an unheard-of 
situation, but we have come together for the people of Ukraine.
    Congressman Ruben Gallego of Arizona.

      STATEMENT OF RUBEN GALLEGO, U.S. HOUSE FROM ARIZONA

    Representative Gallego: Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Dr. Chomiak--I hope I said that correctly--
    Ms. Chomiak: Just Ms. I do not have a doctorate yet, just 
Ms. [Laughs.]
    Representative Gallego: Ah! Well, in case you want it. 
[Laughter.] We will hand them out without the debt, too. 
[Laughter.]
    Thank you for your testimony and for your leadership on 
these urgent humanitarian issues. In your written testimony you 
stated that some critical items need an--are under export 
restrictions in the U.S., which makes it harder or impossible 
to get to Ukraine. Some of the ones you are speaking of were 
consumer drones, thermal cameras, and night vision equipment.
    Can you talk more specifically about where you find the 
greatest hiccups in this export process?
    Ms. Chomiak: Absolutely. Thank you very much for that 
question.
    We have found some hiccups, and specifically, it is in 
protective equipment--bulletproof vests and helmets of level 
three and four. We have been able to get those onto our 
drivers.
    For example, we have drivers that go into small vans and go 
straight into the hot zones and back again. But it is--we did 
that with a partner organization. That is very difficult.
    More and more now there is a need for night vision 
equipment. This is really so that when people are delivering 
aid and moving around, they are able to see what is happening, 
and of course, now, as it is the time of year where it gets 
darker faster and the assault on the electrical grid in Ukraine 
makes it literally darker, that becomes more important.
    We also have had some challenges with civil and enterprise 
drones that are, sort of--in my laymen's terms--like binoculars 
in the sky, so drivers know what is coming up ahead so they can 
get safer, and then communications equipment, which is so 
important, because yes, everyone's got a cell phone in Ukraine, 
but when you are--when there are bad guys around you want to be 
able to speak in encrypted radios so that you can get that aid 
to where it needs to go.
    Those are some of the things that we have tripped up on, so 
issue--if you with your colleagues could work with the 
executive branch to issue a general license so this kind of 
equipment could come to Ukraine, and it do not need to come 
through our organization--through any organization. If it can 
be put in the hands of Ukrainians so they can stay safe, then I 
think we can save a lot of lives because our goal continues to 
be to build a prosperous Ukraine. Right now it is meant--
stopping the bleeding and saving lives, but we continue to do 
education programs, and culture programs, and investment 
programs.
    I would encourage you to also think in terms of the 
investment in Ukraine. What we are all learning here as a 
global community of people who respect rule of law is also this 
opportunity for innovation and investment in technologies--like 
whether it is barcodes or any kind of communications--there is 
really a lot of potential and opportunity. That if we can 
smooth the process of things getting back and forth, I think we 
will all live more comfortably.
    Representative Gallego: Thank you. Mr. Chmut, 
congratulations to Come Back Alive for becoming the first 
charitable organization in Ukraine to receive a license for the 
purchase and import of military and dual--use goods.
    You stressed the importance of removing Ukraine from the 
crime-control column of the commerce-control list. How would 
this change impact Come Back Alive, and what would you then be 
able to provide for Ukraine's defense?
    Mr. Chmut: [Through interpreter.] Thank you for your 
question. For us and for our American partners, this will allow 
to purchase American equipment and technology faster than 
before. If Ukraine is removed from that column of that category 
that you mentioned, that will speed up delivery of supplies for 
Ukraine tremendously.
    It is unfortunate that the war has such a big scale, and 
the losses are so significant that the Ukrainian government on 
its own can--or even government help from the United States 
cannot fully cover all those needs that continue to exist. This 
is why it is so important for us to achieve all possible 
simplifications of the procedures that will make our work more 
effective.
    Representative Gallego: Thank you. The next question is for 
Mr. Ohman.
    As somebody who has witnessed the evolving frontline role 
of Ukraine's civil society, do you see pathways toward greater 
cooperation between Ukraine civil society and international 
partners? In what ways can the international community help you 
expand networks and effectively employ the experience you and 
others have built up over the last few years helping Ukraine?
    Mr. Ohman: Yes, indeed. Thank you for the question. It is a 
very intricate one.
    We must understand it is very important--I will just give 
you one example. Lithuania, where we have this impressive, may 
I say, support from the civil society in general, in terms of 
fundraising, et cetera, et cetera, whereas in other countries 
it is a very different situation--where people consider the 
world order differently.
    We are working with a challenge, as we speak, trying to 
find ways to actually, so to speak, increase the awareness of 
the situation in Ukraine and the need--as some have said, this 
is our war. We have to deal with it, all of us, because 
otherwise the consequence may be extremely dire.
    As for--I would like to take this to a little different 
level. When we are talking about international cooperation, 
let's say also with government actors. At points--I can give 
you one example. We have been using NATO habinjeshof for 
getting things--items, equipment--into Ukraine fast without 
sort of cutting some of the tape.
    This has been done in cooperation with parts of the NATO 
establishment with the great knowledge of officers, et cetera. 
We see--this is my remark--we see definitely--we also have been 
supporting, for instance, the Ukrainian Special Forces heavily 
with night vision and other high-end items via the Lithuanian 
Special Forces.
    This cooperation is already happening, but on a smaller 
level. I definitely would like to address the need for a 
discussion, a dialogue, exactly on these issues. We, the civil 
society, have proven, may I say, our capacity, our 
capabilities, and our abilities in Ukraine over many, many 
years, and I would definitely welcome a somewhat more--a more 
open-minded mindset from--let's say, from the supporting 
parties in the West--NATO, U.S. and others.
    How could we do this? I think we all agree that we have to 
do more. We have to be smarter. We have to do things more 
efficiently. For that, we have to find the ways.
    I would like to see this hearing maybe as a start for this 
dialogue because this has to be discussed. We have shown we can 
do things, and we have shown that we have ways, sometimes. 
Sometimes when we are up to 10 to 20 times faster than the 
support coming in from abroad. I have several specific examples 
of that.
    I think yes, I welcome your question. I mean, turning it 
back to you, we are open for dialogue. Let's talk.
    Thank you.
    Representative Gallego: Thank you, Mr. Ohman. I have been 
also very lucky to see U.S. civil society and helped where I 
can to send support over and been very encouraged by a lot of 
patriotic Americans and patriotic Ukrainian-Americans that have 
been wanting to help out. Of course, whatever we can do here in 
Congress we shall continue to do.
    It is a pleasure working with my good friend Mr. Wilson on 
issues when it comes to Ukraine, so I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
    Representative Wilson: Thank you very much, and again, you 
see heartfelt support by Democrats and Republicans for the 
people of Ukraine.
    Mr.--Director Chmut, it should be noted that the four 
organizations that are here have actually raised almost a 
billion dollars from small donors across Ukraine, across 
Europe, from around the world, from the United States, from 
small donors.
    It is with that an issue that has come up that I would like 
Director Chmut to answer and then the rest of you, too, and 
that is, a concern as to oversight, Come Back Alive--how does 
Come Back Alive conduct oversight to make sure that the 
equipment is getting to the right people at the right time, 
that there is not a misuse, that there is not a diversion?
    We need to reassure taxpayers and donors, and so if each of 
you could address that. It is an issue that needs to be 
addressed, and I know that you can.
    Mr. Chmut: [Through interpreter.] Of course I can answer 
this. The war has been in place for almost nine years now, and 
in the course of this time we were able to develop an effective 
system of interaction with the military forces.
    All the things that we donate are officially put on the 
stock list of the military, of actually specific units of the 
military forces so the general staff and the logistics command 
know precisely what we delivered and to whom and how much. That 
way, they do not need to repeat what we were doing and we do 
not repeat what they are doing.
    Along with that, our field managers have access to every 
unit with which we collaborate and to which we have made 
deliveries. They are allowed to come in at any time and check 
in person where is--where are the things we delivered and in 
what condition they are. This is our oversight. If a certain 
item was destroyed or damaged in battle, we can come and make 
sure that it really was damaged or destroyed but not, like, 
stolen or something.
    The key, too, here is that we have close contact with 
specific units at the level of battalions or even companies. 
Owing to that, we can confidently verify everything that is 
needed.
    Representative Wilson: That is excellent, Director. Thank 
you.
    Founder Prytula.
    Ms. Prytula: Yes. You need to understand that we take a big 
responsibility with people's money because all Ukrainian 
society, they donate to our foundations, even little kids. From 
August of this year until this moment, little kids in age five 
years, eight years, 10 years, they bring to our foundation 
about $200,000.
    Representative Wilson: Wow.
    Ms. Prytula: Yes. That is something unbelievable and we 
have a lot of different stories about little kids, a little 
girl that just cut her hair to sell it and to bring money to 
our foundation to help the Ukrainian Army. It is why we live 
with this responsibility.
    Also, we all start to be volunteers from 2014. That is why 
we have not only experience; we know a lot of commanders and we 
had a lot of possibilities to check them. That is why we trust 
them. A lot of people trust us. We trust our military. We also 
trust our logistic forces. As said my colleague, we send them 
all information about our supplies because customs control us 
and we also need to control our military in some way. We have 
in this way.
    Representative Wilson: Thank you very much.
    President Chomiak.
    Ms. Chomiak: If I can build on what both of my esteemed 
colleagues have said and say Razom also follows procedures of 
inventory lists and handing things to the--to the right end 
user and keeping track of it. We take with great responsibility 
our over 150,000 donors from every state and several countries.
    On top of that, I just want to add that this works because 
the people who are doing this, when we talk about a trusted 
network, when we talk about volunteering since 2014 or even 
sooner, I would just ask everyone to think about who you went 
to middle school with. Imagine someone in your middle-school 
science class, right? That person knows you in a different way 
than any professional person. Those are the kinds of people 
that are working together now. It is people who have known each 
other for years, and it is these personal ties, and it is the 
responsibility in front of the child that did a bake sale.
    Or in Arizona there is a fantastic group called the Cactus 
and the Trident, which I just have to give a shout out to 
because you are here, Representative Gallego. Groups like this 
that--and this responsibility in front of them, but also it is 
people in Ukraine who are building their country. I think they 
have a lot to teach us Americans here, what that means is 
showing up and doing something every day and showing up again. 
I think it is inspiring and very helpful to remember that it is 
people making connections with other people and trusting each 
other. That is how it works.
    Representative Wilson: Thank you.
    Founder Ohman?
    Mr. Ohman: Yes. To answer, I agree with all previous 
speakers.
    I guess to recite to my initial remarks, we have no choice. 
We have to provide accountability. We have to give an idea what 
we do with the money. Yes, it is people's money. We need to 
create--we have systems for it, obviously. We hand over end-
user certificates, acts of--upon receiving the goods, et 
cetera, et cetera, and--because we have to. Again, we are--our 
accountability is a crucial part of our actions.
    If you will allow Rima, she would like to say a few words 
in addition to that.

 STATEMENT OF RIMA ZIURAITIENE, MANAGING DIRECTOR, BLUE/YELLOW 
                              USA

    Ms. Ziuraitiene: Well, first, Congressman Wilson, thank you 
for your words about Lithuania as being an international 
leader. We appreciate your support.
    Also, I am the managing director of Blue/Yellow USA 
nonprofit. We run the same type of accountability standards as 
well. We have inventory lists. We focus on where everything 
goes. We speak directly with units. We get official stamped 
requests. Nothing leaves without an official request. We also 
have a system wherever--whenever one thing is, you know, given 
out to a unit, we mark it. Everything is marked and tracked, 
especially because--it is true--it is public donor money and we 
have to be very careful with where it goes.
    Represntative Wilson: Indeed, back to Lithuania. On my 
visits to the Baltic republics--Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania--I 
am always so grateful to be aware that the United States never 
recognized the Soviet occupation of the Baltic republics. We 
always stood for the independence of the three Baltic 
republics. Then this really is an inspiration to the people of 
Ukraine, and that is that the economic success which is so 
obvious for the Baltic republics. Wow. Now, with Finland and 
Sweden part of NATO, the security level for the Baltics has 
never been better. We have so much to be grateful for and look 
forward to.
    I would point out another point. To back up your 
maintenance of the integrity of your donations, we are in a 
world today of cellphones. In this world, everything is seen. 
Everything is recorded. That is helpful to you and it is 
helpful to your donors and taxpayers to know that the equipment 
can be so well-monitored--that prior to the incredible 
cellphone capabilities it could not be done, but it can now. I 
see that as reassuring.
    At this time, if there are no further questions--and again, 
what a superstar Congressman Gallego is, Ruben Gallego from the 
beautiful state of Arizona. He truly has been a champion for 
the people of Ukraine and it is been very inspiring. As you 
saw, our Senate colleagues--as we like to refer to them as 
members of the House of Lords. [Laughter.] We are just so 
fortunate to have, again, in such a bipartisan manner.
    At this time, as we conclude, I woud like for Congressman 
Gallego and I to join you. Please stay seated. We would like--
everybody looks so good, I want the world to see this. We want 
to get a picture of you seated, Okay? The bear, Mademoiselle, 
what is the--
    Mr. Ohman: It is our spiritual leader panda.
    Representative Wilson: Panda.
    Mr. Ohman: It--[inaudible]--in the front line. Mr. Kyle 
Parker in the back has been together with him in Kherson area 
providing night vision to 46th Brigade. So, yes.
    Representative Wilson: Oh, fantastic. Well, I could not 
pass without asking what the panda was.
    Hey, with that, we are adjourned. [Sounds gavel.]
    [Whereupon, at 3:39 p.m., the hearing ended.]

                                 

