
 - NOMINATION TO THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION AND THE NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION

[Senate Hearing 117-709]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]


                                                        S. Hrg. 117-709

                   NOMINATION TO THE U.S. DEPARTMENT
                    OF COMMERCE, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
                    TRANSPORTATION AND THE NATIONAL
                  AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION

=======================================================================

                                HEARING

                               BEFORE THE

                         COMMITTEE ON COMMERCE,
                      SCIENCE, AND TRANSPORTATION
                          UNITED STATES SENATE

                    ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

                             FIRST SESSION

                               __________

                              MAY 20, 2021

                               __________

    Printed for the use of the Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
                             Transportation
                             
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]                             


                Available online: http://www.govinfo.gov
                
                                __________

                                
                    U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE                    
53-093 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2023                    
          
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------                  
                
                
                
       SENATE COMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, SCIENCE, AND TRANSPORTATION

                    ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

                             FIRST SESSION

                   MARIA CANTWELL, Washington, Chair
AMY KLOBUCHAR, Minnesota             ROGER WICKER, Mississippi, Ranking
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL, Connecticut      JOHN THUNE, South Dakota
BRIAN SCHATZ, Hawaii                 ROY BLUNT, Missouri
EDWARD MARKEY, Massachusetts         TED CRUZ, Texas
GARY PETERS, Michigan                DEB FISCHER, Nebraska
TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin             JERRY MORAN, Kansas
TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois            DAN SULLIVAN, Alaska
JON TESTER, Montana                  MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee
KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona              TODD YOUNG, Indiana
JACKY ROSEN, Nevada                  MIKE LEE, Utah
BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico            RON JOHNSON, Wisconsin
JOHN HICKENLOOPER, Colorado          SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West 
RAPHAEL WARNOCK, Georgia                 Virginia
                                     RICK SCOTT, Florida
                                     CYNTHIA LUMMIS, Wyoming
                    David Strickland, Staff Director
                 Melissa Porter, Deputy Staff Director
       George Greenwell, Policy Coordinator and Security Manager
                 John Keast, Republican Staff Director
            Crystal Tully, Republican Deputy Staff Director
                      Steven Wall, General Counsel
                            
                            C O N T E N T S

                              ----------                              
                                                                   Page
Hearing held on May 20, 2021.....................................     1
Statement of Senator Cantwell....................................     1
Statement of Senator Fischer.....................................    54
Statement of Senator Schatz......................................    56
Statement of Senator Warnock.....................................    58
Statement of Senator Peters......................................    59
Statement of Senator Blackburn...................................    61
Statement of Senator Rosen.......................................    63
Statement of Senator Lujan.......................................    64
Statement of Senator Cruz........................................    66
Statement of Senator Klobuchar...................................    68
    Prepared statement...........................................

                               Witnesses

Hon. Mark Kelly, U.S. Senator from Arizona.......................     4
Richard W. Spinrad, Ph.D., Nominee to be Under Secretary of 
  Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere; and Administrator, National 
  Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, U.S. Department of 
  Commerce.......................................................     6
    Prepared statement...........................................     7
    Biographical information.....................................     8
Colonel Pamela A. Melroy (USAF, Ret.), Nominee to be Deputy 
  Administrator, National Aeronautics and Space Administration...    29
    Prepared statement...........................................    31
    Biographical information.....................................    32
Carlos A. Monje, Jr., Nominee to be Under Secretary of 
  Transportation for Policy, U.S. Department of Transportation...    40
    Prepared statement...........................................    42
    Biographical information.....................................    43

                                Appendix

Response to written questions submitted to Richard W. Spinrad, 
  Ph.D. by:
    Hon. Maria Cantwell..........................................    73
    Hon. Jon Tester..............................................    76
    Hon. Jacky Rosen.............................................    76
    Hon. Dan Sullivan............................................    78
    Hon. Roger Wicker............................................    77
    Hon. Rick Scott..............................................    79
Response to written questions submitted to Col. Pamela A. Melroy 
  by:
    Hon. Jon Tester..............................................    80
    Roger Wicker.................................................    81
    Hon. Rick Scott..............................................    82
Response to written questions submitted to Carlos A. Monje, Jr. 
  by:
    Hon. Jon Tester..............................................    83
    Hon. Jacky Rosen.............................................    84
    Hon. Roger Wicker............................................    84
    Hon. Dan Sullivan............................................    87

 
                   NOMINATION TO THE U.S. DEPARTMENT
                    OF COMMERCE, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
                    TRANSPORTATION AND THE NATIONAL
                  AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION

                              ----------                              


                         THURSDAY, MAY 20, 2021

                                       U.S. Senate,
        Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation,
                                                    Washington, DC.
    The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:13 a.m., in 
room SH-216, Hart Senate Office Building, Hon. Maria Cantwell, 
Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
    Present: Senators Cantwell [presiding], Klobuchar, Schatz, 
Peters, Rosen, Lujan, Warnock, Cruz, Fischer, and Blackburn.

           OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARIA CANTWELL, 
                  U.S. SENATOR FROM WASHINGTON

    The Chairwoman. Now we turn to our nominations hearing 
today before the Committee. And we have a panel of nominees 
here in very important positions for our Government. First, Dr. 
Rick Spinrad is the President's nominee to Undersecretary of 
Oceans and Atmosphere, and also known as the NOAA Administrator 
at the Department of Commerce. Dr. Spinrad, welcome to you and 
to your wife, Alanna.
    Thank you for your willingness to serve. We are pleased 
that Congresswoman Susan Bonamici of Oregon will be providing 
introductory remarks for Dr. Spinrad as well. And we thank you 
for your leadership on many of these policies in the House of 
Representatives. Dr. Spinrad's career in academia, as well as 
the Federal service at NOAA and in the U.S. Navy have made him 
ready for success in running our Nation's premier client's--
workforce.
    NOAA's sciences touch almost every aspect of our economy 
from weather forecasting, the need to keep our communities 
safe, to satellite data needed for precision agriculture, to 
ensuring that millions of jobs in the United States supported 
in the seafood industry are managed sustainably and on science. 
Science is critical across NOAA's missions. But for us in the 
Pacific Northwest, science based fisheries management is 
paramount. Salmon are central to our coastal economy, to our 
culture, to our treaty rights, and they are crucial to the 
survival of our orca population.
    So we have, on a bipartisan basis, secured investments in 
salmon recovery and restoration. In 2018, Senator Risch and I 
worked on the Endangered Salmon Predator Prevention Act, and 
there are many things that we have done to focus on what we 
need to do on habitat, on replacing blocked culverts, on 
working on other barriers that prevent salmon from returning to 
spawning grounds. So I plan to ask Dr. Spinrad important 
questions about that, particularly as it relates to the urban 
oasis that salmon in Puget Sound represent, and what are the 
things that we need to do in reducing stormwater runoff, 
pollution, and other things that are just like here in this 
side of the country at the Chesapeake, impacting our fisheries.
    So we need leadership on salmon recovery, and I look 
forward to his comments. Next, we consider the nomination of 
Col. Pam Melroy to be Deputy Administrator of NASA. I welcome 
her and her husband, Doug. Senator Kelly will be here to 
formally introduce Col. Melroy, who I believe they have worked 
together, and he will have a unique perspective. I have spoken 
about the importance of elevating women to science and 
technical leadership roles, and I couldn't be more pleased to 
see that President Biden has done that in nominating Col. 
Melroy.
    She has an impressive background, having served as the 
Space Shuttle Commander and Astronaut and an Air Force officer 
in the Commercial Space Office at FAA and at DARPA and as an 
aerospace executive. So it is hard to imagine a more qualified 
person for this role. Col. Melroy, should you be confirmed, we 
will ask you to pay special attention in keeping the agency on 
track on the Mars via Artemis program mission, using the 
inspiration of potential NASA to inspire the next generation of 
aerospace professionals, again, in the level of diversity that 
we would like to see, and focusing on maintaining our 
competitiveness and redundancy on our missions on issues like 
the Human Lander Project.
    Ranking Member Wicker and I put forth our vision of NASA, 
an amendment adopted unanimously--put forth our vision in the 
NASA--put forth in the Endless Frontier Act our NASA vision, 
and I hope that this time our colleagues will help us get it 
over the goal line in the House of Representatives so we can 
have a clear congressional record for our intent about the 
Artemis mission and how we expect NASA to move forward. So I 
look forward to having those conversations.
    And finally, we will consider the nomination of Carlos 
Monje Jr. to be the Undersecretary of Policy at the Department 
of Transportation. Welcome to you and to your wife, Ann. And 
Mr. Monje will serve as the Acting Undersecretary and Assistant 
Secretary of Transportation Policy for the U.S. Department of 
Transportation. During the Obama Administration, he oversaw the 
implementation of surface transportation programs, the 
discretionary grant programs, and efforts to promote equity and 
economic development. He also served as Chief of Staff of the 
White House Domestic Policy Council and Special Assistant to 
President--to the President during President Obama's 
Administration.
    So, again, thank you for your willingness to answer the 
call to serve. Our transportation system, as we all know, is 
the backbone of our economy, and getting people to and from 
work is critically important. I can say in my state, it also is 
very important in exports and the export economy. Getting our 
products and products from other states through our ports into 
their final destinations is a big economic driver, so making 
sure that we continue to address the efficiency as we come out 
of the pandemic is something we will be asking Mr. Monje about 
during our questioning.
    So I thank, again, our colleagues--I know that Senator 
Wicker made the comments and is putting in a larger, longer 
statement for the record. So we will now turn to our witnesses 
to, or I guess I should say our guests, to help us introduce 
our witnesses. And we will start with you, Congresswoman 
Bonamici. Again, thank you for being here.
    Ms. Bonamici. Thank you so much. Chair Cantwell, Ranking 
Member Wicker, senators, it is my distinct honor to introduce a 
fellow Oregonian and President Biden's nominee for 
Undersecretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere and 
Administrator of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration, Dr. Richard Spinrad. Dr. Spinrad is an 
internationally recognized scientist and leader with more than 
35 years of experience. In 2014, President Obama appointed Dr. 
Spinrad to serve as NOAA's Chief Scientist. Dr Spinrad co-lead 
the White House committee that developed the Nation's first set 
of ocean research priorities and oversaw the revamping of 
NOAA's research enterprise.
    From 2003 until 2010, he served as the head of NOAA's 
Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research and the National 
Ocean Service, demonstrating the breadth of his experience 
across the agency. Today, Dr. Spinrad is a Professor of 
Oceanography at Oregon State University, where he previously 
served as Vice President for Research. If confirmed, Dr. 
Spinrad would be the third person from Oregon State University 
to lead NOAA, which we, even the University of Oregon ducks 
like me, are very proud of back home.
    Dr. Spinrad's passion for ocean and climate science has 
been a lifelong endeavor. After studying Earth and planetary 
sciences at Johns Hopkins University and Oceanography at Oregon 
State University, Dr. Spinrad held leadership positions at the 
U.S. Office of Naval Research and Oceanographer of the Navy. He 
was awarded the Distinguished Civilian Service Award, the 
Navy's highest award for civilians. Dr. Spinrad also has 
extensive experience in the nonprofit sector and in academia. 
Throughout my time as co-chair of the bipartisan House Oceans 
Caucus, I have relied on Dr. Spinrad's extraordinary expertise.
    As an ocean scientist, he embodies the value of bipartisan 
leadership through his demonstrated experience, working across 
party lines and developing partnerships with Members of 
Congress. Most importantly, he understands firsthand NOAA's 
mission of science, service, and stewardship. During his time 
at NOAA, Dr. Spinrad successfully negotiated efforts to 
establish a global tsunami warning system, and he wrote key 
components of the Administration's ocean action plan. He is 
deeply familiar with NOAA's climate, weather, fisheries, and 
ocean research and exploration efforts, which means that he is 
prepared, if confirmed, to get to work on day one. Dr. Spinrad 
was an integral player in developing NOAA's scientific 
integrity policy.
    I am confident that he will deter any suppression, 
censorship, or manipulation of science at the agency and the 
Department of Commerce. With Dr. Spinrad's leadership in 
restoring scientific integrity policies, our efforts to inform 
the public about extreme weather events, manage marine 
resources, and solve the climate crisis will be informed by the 
best available science. Dr. Spinrad also recognizes the 
economic potential of the blue economy, which, according to 
NOAA's estimates, contributes $7.6 trillion to the U.S. economy 
annually.
    As Congress and the Biden Administration work together to 
build back better, I know we can count on Dr. Spinrad's 
partnership to help revitalize our coastal communities and 
create good paying jobs. We are at a critical juncture to 
protect the health of our oceans and our planet in the climate 
crisis. As our Nation's premier climate science agency, NOAA is 
an important--in an important position to help deliver on the 
Biden Administration's goals.
    By confirming Dr. Spinrad, you can help raise the profile 
of NOAA as a key player in those conversations. And as we begin 
the U.N. decade of ocean science for sustainable development, 
we can count on Dr. Spinrad's leadership to help rapidly 
accelerate the collection, management, and dissemination of 
ocean data to protect the health of our oceans and our coastal 
communities. I strongly urge you and your colleagues to confirm 
Dr. Spinrad promptly so he can get to work to protect the 
health of our ocean, deliver the best possible weather data and 
services to our communities, and help in our efforts to solve 
the climate crisis. Thank you all for your time and 
consideration.
    The Chairwoman. Thank you, Congresswoman. We know you have 
a busy schedule, so we so appreciate you being here. And again, 
thank you for your leadership in the House of Representatives 
on these very, very important issues. Thank you. Now we will 
turn to Senator Kelly. Thank you for joining us this morning to 
introduce Col. Melroy.

                 STATEMENT OF HON. MARK KELLY, 
                   U.S. SENATOR FROM ARIZONA

    Senator Kelly. Thank you, Chair Cantwell and Ranking Member 
Wicker, for welcoming me here today to your committee hearing. 
It is quite an honor for me to have the opportunity to 
introduce my friend and my former boss, Col. Pam Melroy, as you 
consider her nomination to be the Deputy Administrator at NASA. 
Pam has a range of operational and program management 
experience that makes her an outstanding choice for this job.
    As many of you know, I spent 15 years at NASA. I was 
selected as an astronaut in 1996, just two years after Col. 
Melroy. We spent more than a decade working together where I 
came to know her as an incredibly competent and hardworking 
leader. We were both space shuttle pilots and then shuttle 
commanders. Pam is one of only two women in our country's 
history to command the space shuttle. That is a difficult job. 
You spend 2 years at more or less training your crew, working 
with a large team for this mission. You are responsible for 
their lives as you launch into space and come back to Earth. 
You are responsible for the success or failure of the mission. 
Any number of things can go wrong, and you are trained to 
handle them calmly and competently while leading a team in a 
dynamic and challenging environment.
    And you do all this while exiting or entering the 
atmosphere or what, docking with the space station, orbiting 
the Earth at 25 times the speed of sound. She excelled, and 
from that experience, she understands the challenges that this 
generation of astronauts will face as they test and deploy new 
technology to get to the Moon and then to Mars. But here is the 
thing, she also has experience managing the types of programs 
that will be needed to get us there. Pam was my boss when she 
was the Advanced Vehicles Branch Chief supporting the design of 
new spacecraft and new systems.
    She was a terrific boss and a great program manager. After 
leaving NASA, Pam worked at the FAA and then at DARPA, where 
she was Deputy Director of the Tactical Technology Office. 
Again, she was managing complex programs that involved 
developing and testing cutting edge technology. That experience 
is critical if NASA is going to be successful in accomplishing 
what we are asking them to do.
    America's space program has a bright future ahead and bold 
goals to get back to the moon and then put a human on the 
planet Mars. Achieving these goals requires capable leaders who 
can manage complex programs while also navigating operational 
challenges posed by developing, testing, and deploying new 
technology like new rockets, like space stations, or science 
missions, and critical programs for our country's future. Col. 
Melroy----
    The Chairwoman. Senator Kelly, if you could just suspend 
for a second. I think someone--someone is on our system. If 
anybody who is online could mute.
    Senator Kelly. Alright.
    The Chairwoman. Thank you. Thank you, Senator Kelly.
    Senator Kelly. [Technical problems.] Well, Col. Melroy is 
without a doubt the right person at the right time for this 
job. No one is going to work harder or smarter at achieving the 
goals we are putting in front of NASA than she will. So, Pam, 
it is such an honor for me to introduce you at this 
confirmation hearing today. I look forward to all of you on the 
Committee getting to know Col. Melroy better through this 
process. And then I look forward to working with her and the 
great folks at NASA to reach new heights with our space 
program. Thank you, and I yield back.
    The Chairwoman. Thank you. Thank you, Senator Kelly. Thank 
you for being here. And we do treasure your membership in the 
U.S. Senate at a time when we are expressing such an aggressive 
agenda on space. So we love the fact that we have an expert in 
our midst so we can consult with. So thank you for being here 
today. So I now ask the nominees to please come to the table 
and thank you again for your willingness to serve.
    Please take an opportunity to introduce your families, if 
you would like, and make your opening statements, and then we 
will turn to questions. And I think, Dr. Spinrad, I think we 
are starting with you first. And appreciate, again, 
everybody's--trying to keep your presentations to 5 minutes and 
then that will allow us the most amount of time to have 
questions with our colleagues. Thank you.

  STATEMENT OF RICHARD W. SPINRAD, Ph.D., NOMINEE TO BE UNDER 
             SECRETARY OF COMMERCE FOR OCEANS AND 
ATMOSPHERE; AND ADMINISTRATOR, NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC 
          ADMINISTRATION, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE

    Mr. Spinrad. Chair Cantwell, Ranking Member Wicker, members 
of the Committee, I am Rick Spinrad, a professor at Oregon 
State University, and I am honored to be nominated by President 
Biden for the position of Undersecretary of Commerce for Oceans 
and Atmosphere and Administrator of the National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration. I am especially grateful to 
Commerce Secretary Gina Raimondo for her support of my 
nomination.
    I also want to thank members of the Committee for taking 
time to meet with me and share their perspectives. And special 
thanks to my wife of 41 years, Alanna, here today, whose love, 
patience, and tolerance are the secret weapons for any success 
that I have enjoyed. My passion for the ocean began early. As a 
13 year old in the New York City public school system, I was 
fortunate to have one teacher who ignited in me an unbridled 
curiosity about the sea.
    My subsequent studies afforded me the opportunity to spend 
hundreds of days at sea and to perform research sponsored by 
numerous Federal agencies. But I felt compelled to put this 
work in a broader context through leadership positions in 
industry, academia, Government and non-Governmental 
organizations. This breadth of experience has given me a unique 
understanding of how science is developed and applied. It also 
gave me a deep appreciation for the sanctity of science and the 
importance of scientific integrity.
    My Government experience has afforded me invaluable insight 
into leadership and management, as well as the efficient 
operationalization of research. At the U.S. Navy and in NOAA, I 
translated scientific concepts into new products such as a 
warning system for harmful algal blooms and the framework for a 
global tsunami warning system. I have a deep understanding of 
the role public agencies play in the development and use of 
environmental information. As the former president of a small 
company, I understand the requirements and operational tempo of 
business. Commerce Secretary Raimondo recently expressed her 
eagerness to engage in public, private partnerships in the 
Department.
    To that end, I, too, believe strongly that continually 
improving the dynamic of the public, private enterprise is an 
essential element of economic development. My own non-
Governmental organization experience gives me a deep 
appreciation for the role NGOs play in the policymaking 
process. I have led several professional societies and 
consulted for 501(c)(3) organizations where I helped bridge the 
communities of research and advocacy.
    Academia is another critical partner for NOAA and a sector 
I know well having served on the faculties and senior 
Administration of three different public universities. I 
believe this diversity of background has positioned me well to 
deal with the breadth of stakeholders and issues reflected in 
the NOAA mission. If confirmed, I would come into the position 
of Administrator with a broad and deep knowledge of the inner 
workings of the agency, and I believe I am well equipped to 
handle the challenges and support the Administration's vision 
for the future. I would like to share my thoughts on how NOAA 
can continue to play a vital role in the future of our Nation.
    We must build on NOAA's long history of success and meet 
the needs of the future by expanding, diversifying, and 
enhancing products and services for all Americans. If 
confirmed, I would take a full integrated perspective to ensure 
the agency is imparting the best-in-class earth system 
intelligence, providing, for example, climate services and 
products in fisheries, weather, and oceans in an equitable and 
just manner for its many stakeholders.
    We must strengthen and galvanize the relationship of NOAA 
with the private sector, academia, other Federal agencies, non-
Governmental organizations, and philanthropy. The Federal 
Government must help resolve the roles and responsibilities of 
all players in the field of addressing climate change with a 
clear definition of who does what, how they do it, and when and 
why specific products are developed in what order. We must 
ensure that NOAA builds economic opportunities while upholding 
the critical role of environmental stewardship.
    This function will apply to efforts associated with 
adapting to and mitigating climate change, as well as 
bolstering the established and new blue economies. We must 
position NOAA to take an aggressive and active role in 
diversifying the Federal workforce and the general STEM 
community in a just, equitable and inclusive manner. As one of 
the original authors of NOAA's Policy on Scientific Integrity, 
if confirmed, I also am fully committed to ensuring that NOAA 
scientists can do their work, publish their results, and engage 
broadly.
    We must capitalize on NOAA's technical strengths to bolster 
the U.S. position as a leader in global environmental issues. 
The U.S. must be recognized unquestionably as a strong leader, 
not only in developing the relevant technologies and scientific 
programs, but also as a problem solver and capacity enhancer. I 
am humbled to appear before you, and if confirmed, I am 
energized by the prospects of working with the extraordinary 
individuals in NOAA. I welcome your questions. Thank you.
    [The prepared statement and biographical information of Mr. 
Spinrad follow:]

 Prepared Statement of Richard W. Spinrad, Ph.D., Nominee to be Under 
  Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere; and Administrator, 
  National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, U.S. Department of 
                                Commerce
    Chair Cantwell, Ranking Member Wicker, Members of the Committee, I 
am Rick Spinrad, a Professor at Oregon State University. I am honored 
to be nominated by President Biden for the position of Under Secretary 
of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere and Administrator of the National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). I am especially grateful 
to Commerce Secretary Gina Raimondo for her support of my nomination. I 
also want to thank members of the Committee for taking time to meet 
with me and share their perspectives.
    My passion for the ocean began early. As a 13 year-old in the New 
York City public school system I was fortunate to have one teacher who 
ignited in me an unbridled curiosity about the sea. My subsequent 
studies afforded me the opportunity to spend hundreds of days at sea, 
and to perform research sponsored by numerous Federal agencies. But I 
felt compelled to put this work in a broader context through leadership 
positions in industry, academia, government and non-governmental 
organizations (NGOs). This breadth of experience has given me a unique 
understanding of how science is developed and applied. It also gave me 
a deep appreciation for the sanctity of science and the importance of 
scientific integrity.
    My government experience has afforded me valuable insight into 
leadership and management, as well as the efficient operationalization 
of research. At the U.S. Navy and in NOAA, I translated scientific 
concepts into new products, such as a warning system for harmful algal 
blooms, and the framework for a global tsunami warning system. I have a 
deep understanding of the role public agencies play in the development 
and use of environmental information.
    As the former President of a small company, I understand the 
requirements and operational tempo of business. Commerce Secretary 
Raimondo recently expressed her eagerness to engage in public-private 
partnerships at the Department. To that end I, too, believe strongly 
that continually improving the dynamic of the public/private enterprise 
is an essential element of economic development.
    My own non-governmental organization experience gives me a deep 
appreciation for the important role NGOs play in the policymaking 
process. I have led several professional societies, and consulted for 
501(c)3 organizations, where I helped bridge the communities of 
research and advocacy.
    Academia is another critical partner for NOAA--and a sector I know 
well, having served on the faculties, and in senior administration, of 
three different public universities.
    I believe this diversity of background has positioned me well to 
deal with the breadth of stakeholders and issues reflected in the NOAA 
mission.
    If confirmed, I would come into the position of Administrator with 
a broad and deep knowledge of the inner workings of the agency, and I 
believe I am well equipped to handle the challenges and support the 
Administration's vision for the future. I'd like to share my thoughts 
on how NOAA can continue to play a vital role in the future of our 
Nation.

   We must build on NOAA's long history of success, and meet 
        the needs of the future by expanding, diversifying and 
        enhancing products and services for all Americans. If 
        confirmed, I would take a fully integrated perspective to 
        ensure the agency is imparting the best-in-class earth system 
        intelligence, providing, for example, climate services and 
        products in fisheries, weather, and oceans--in an equitable and 
        just manner--for its many stakeholders.

   We must strengthen and galvanize the relationship of NOAA 
        with the private sector, academia, other Federal agencies, non-
        governmental organizations, and philanthropy. The Federal 
        Government must help resolve the roles and responsibilities of 
        all players in the field of addressing climate change, with a 
        clear definition of who does what, how they do it, and when and 
        why specific products are developed in what order.

   We must ensure that NOAA builds economic opportunities while 
        upholding the critical role of environmental stewardship. This 
        function will apply to efforts associated with adapting to and 
        mitigating climate change as well as bolstering the established 
        and new blue economies.

   We must position NOAA to take an aggressive and active role 
        in diversifying the Federal workforce, and the general STEM 
        community, in a just, equitable, and inclusive manner. As one 
        of the original authors of NOAA's policy on scientific 
        integrity, if confirmed, I also am fully committed to ensuring 
        that NOAA scientists can do their work, publish their results, 
        and engage broadly.

   We must capitalize on NOAA's technical strengths to bolster 
        the United States' position as a leader in global environmental 
        issues. The United States must be recognized, unquestionably, 
        as a strong leader, not only in developing the relevant 
        technologies and scientific programs, but also as a problem-
        solver and capacity-enhancer.

    I am humbled to appear before you and, if confirmed, I am energized 
by the prospect of working with the extraordinary individuals at NOAA. 
I now welcome your questions.
                                 ______
                                 
                      a. biographical information
    1. Name (Include any former names or nicknames used): Richard 
William Spinrad (nickname Rick)
    2. Position to which nominated: Under Secretary of Commerce for 
Oceans and Atmosphere (NOAA Administrator)
    3. Date of Nomination: April 27, 2021
    4. Address (List current place of residence and office addresses):

        Residence: Information not released to the public.
        Office: Information not provided.

    5. Date and Place of Birth: April 6, 1954; New York, NY USA
    6. Provide the name, position, and place of employment for your 
spouse (if married) and the names and ages of your children (including 
stepchildren and children by a previous marriage).

        Alanna Wynn Spinrad (spouse); retired
        Gary Brian Spinrad (son, age 51); contract work from home 
        (Bend, OR)

    7. List all college and graduate degrees. Provide year and school 
attended.

        Bachelor of Arts (B.A.); The Johns Hopkins University; 1975

        Master of Science (M.S.); Oregon State University; 1978

        Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.); Oregon State University; 1982

    8. List all post-undergraduate employment, and highlight all 
management-level jobs held and any non-managerial jobs that relate to 
the position for which you are nominated.

   Graduate Research Assistant, Oregon State University, 
        Corvallis, OR: 09/75-2/82; conducted and wrote up oceanographic 
        research; graduated in 2/82.

   Research Assistant, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR: 
        3/82-11/82; conducted and wrote up oceanographic research; 
        received post-doc offer to move to Bigelow Lab

   Research Scientist, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences, 
        West Boothbay Harbor, ME: 12/82-12/85; led federally sponsored 
        research projects, including field work at sea; left to take 
        lead role in a start-up business.

   President, Sea Tech Inc., Corvallis, OR: 1/86-8/87; designed 
        and manufactured oceanographic equipment, while conducting 
        basic research in ocean sciences; left when invited to apply 
        for program manager job with U.S. Navy.

   Program Manager, Ocean Optics Program, Office of Naval 
        Research (ONR), GS-14/15: 9/87-9/88; managed basic research 
        programs for U.S. Navy, distributing funding to mostly academic 
        contractors; was promoted to Division Director.

   Director, Ocean Biology/Optics/Chemistry Division (Senior 
        Executive Service), ONR: 10/88-10/93; oversaw the day-to-day 
        activities of a division of roughly 6 other program managers, 
        developed strategic planning and budget materials for Navy's 
        basic research programs in ocean science; was promoted to next 
        hierarchical level during an internal reorganization.

   Director, Ocean, Atmosphere & Space Modeling & Prediction 
        Division (Senior Executive Service), ONR: 11/93-12/94; 
        effectively same role and responsibilities as Director of Ocean 
        Biology/Optics/Chemistry, but with bigger budget and staff; 
        left to take job at a 501c(3) in DC (CORE, see below).

   Adjunct Professor, George Mason University, Fairfax, VA.: 8/
        94-12/97 (while at ONR and CORE); taught intro course on 
        oceanography to undergraduates; left to focus on my full-time 
        jobs.

   Executive Director, Consortium for Oceanographic Research 
        and Education (CORE), Washington, DC.: 12/94-2/99; advocated 
        for ocean research to Congress, developed strategic documents 
        arguing for increased funding for ocean research, reported to a 
        Board of academic member partners of the consortium; left when 
        invited to apply for Technical Director at the Oceanographer of 
        the Navy (see below)

   Adjunct Associate Professor, U.S. Naval Academy, Annapolis, 
        MD.: 1/96-6/99 (while at CORE); advised midshipmen research 
        projects on a part-time basis; left after graduation of final 
        student, and to focus on full-time job at the Oceanographer of 
        the Navy.

   Technical Director, Oceanographer of the Navy (Senior 
        Executive Service): 3/99-5/03; served as senior civilian in the 
        Command, defining strategy and policy for Navy applied research 
        in oceanographic and meteorological applications, while 
        overseeing a small applied research program; left when invited 
        to apply for position at NOAA (see below).

   Assistant Administrator for Ocean Services and Coastal Zone 
        Management, NOAA (Senior Executive Service): 6/03-9/05; oversaw 
        all aspects of management and operations of NOAA's Ocean 
        Service, including annual budget of roughly $400M and staff of 
        1200 civil servants, developed materials for annual 
        President's Budget submission; left when asked by NOAA 
        Administrator to take over leadership of NOAA's Research 
        effort.

   Assistant Administrator for Research, NOAA (Senior Executive 
        Service): 9/05-4/10; effectively same job as AA for NOS, but 
        leading the research efforts (grants, contracts, cooperative 
        institutes, and internal laboratories) for all of NOAA; retired 
        from NOAA.

   Vice President for Research, Oregon State University, 
        Corvallis, OR: 7/10-6/14; supervised and led all research 
        activities and facilities for a tier 1 research university, 
        developing and executing budgets and policies related to 
        research integrity, safety, efficiency, and effectiveness; left 
        when invited to serve as NOAA Chief Scientist by then-NOAA 
        Administrator, Dr. Kathryn Sullivan.

   Chief Scientist (Presidential Appointment--PA), NOAA, 
        Washington, DC: 7/14-12/16; served as senior policy advisor 
        regarding all of NOAA research, advising and representing the 
        Administrator; developed policies regarding scientific 
        integrity, transition of research into operations, and 
        development of future research cooperative institutes; resigned 
        at end of Obama Administration.

   Senior Advisor to the Vice President for Research; Professor 
        of Oceanography, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR: 10/17-
        Present (0.4 FTE); advising the VP for research on spectrum of 
        activities including strategies for Federal funding, plans for 
        research infrastructure investment, and led fundraising effort 
        for match-funds for federally funded wave energy project; still 
        active.

   Principal and Founder, High Desert Ocean Associates, LLC, 
        Bend, OR: 11/17 to present; conducting contracted consulting on 
        ocean science and policy programs and issues, for a variety of 
        corporate, government, and academic clients.

   Principal and Co-Founder, Oceans 360 Group, LLC, Seattle, 
        WA: 12/17 to present; conducting contracted consulting on ocean 
        science and policy programs and issues, for a variety of 
        corporate, government, and academic clients.

    9. Attach a copy of your resume.
    Attached as Appendix A.
    10. List any advisory, consultative, honorary, or other part-time 
service or positions with Federal, State, or local governments, other 
than those listed above, within the last ten years.

        Vice-Chair, U.S. National Committee for the Decade of Ocean 
        Science Sustainable Development, 2020 to present

        Member, Ocean Studies Board of the National Academies of 
        Sciences, Engineering and Medicine, 2019 to present

        Member, Roundtable on Science and Technology for 
        Sustainability, National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and 
        Medicine, 2015-2016

        Member, Committee on Environment, Natural Resources and 
        Sustainability, National Science and Technology Council, White 
        House Office of Science and Technology Policy, 2014-2016

        Member, Committee on Science, National Science and Technology 
        Council, White House Office of Science and Technology Policy, 
        2014-2016

        Council Member, Government-University-Industry Research 
        Roundtable, National Academies of Science, Engineering and 
        Medicine, 2014-2016

        President, Oregon Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Business Enterprise, 
        2013-2014

        Member\1\, Ocean Research Advisory Panel Federal Advisory 
        Committee, 2013-2014
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ Nominated and approved, service pre-empted by Presidential 
Appointment to NOAA

        Chair, Federal Advisory Committee on Integrated Ocean Observing 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
        Systems, 2012-2014

        Chair and Technical Advisor, Oregon Innovation Council, 
        Commercialized Research Committee, 2012-2014

        Commissioner, Corvallis Economic Development Commission, 2011-
        2014

        Board Member, Oregon Built Environment and Sustainable 
        Technology Signature Research Center, 2010-2014

        Board Member, Oregon Translational Research and Development 
        Institute, 2010-2014

        MEDEA, Advisory committee, 2010-2014

    11. List all positions held as an officer, director, trustee, 
partner, proprietor, agent, representative, or consultant of any 
corporation, company, firm, partnership, or other business, enterprise, 
educational, or other institution within the last ten years.

        Consultant, Louisiana State University, 2020 Consultant, 
        Accenture, Inc., 2020

        Member, Schmidt Ocean Institute Advisory Board, 2020 to present

        Member, Advisory Panel for Monterey Bay Aquarium Research 
        Institute, 2019-2020

        President, Marine Technology Society, 2019-2020

        Chair, Australian Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial 
        Research Organisation (CSIRO) Oceans and Atmosphere Business 
        Unit Review Panel, 2018

        Member, New Zealand Government National Science Challenge 
        Review Panelist: (1) The Deep South, and; (2) Sustainable Seas, 
        2018

        Member, Scientific Advisory Board, The Ocean Cleanup, 2017 to 
        present

        Member, Advisory Committee for the National Ocean Sciences 
        Bowl, Consortium for Ocean Leadership, 2017 to present

        President-Elect, Marine Technology Society, 2013-2014; 2017-
        2018

        Councilor, American Meteorological Society, 2009-2013

        Member, Google Ocean Advisory Committee, 2007-2013

        Member, External Advisory Board, Center for Coastal Margin 
        Observation & Prediction, Oregon Health and Science University, 
        2006-2010

    12. Please list each membership you have had during the past ten 
years or currently hold with any civic, social, charitable, 
educational, political, professional, fraternal, benevolent or 
religiously affiliated organization, private club, or other membership 
organization. (For this question, you do not have to list your 
religious affiliation or membership in a religious house of worship or 
institution.). Include dates of membership and any positions you have 
held with any organization. Please note whether any such club or 
organization restricts membership on the basis of sex, race, color, 
religion, national origin, age, or disability.

        American Association for the Advancement of Science (1990 to 
        present)

        American Meteorological Society (FELLOW) (2003 to present); 
        Council member, 2010-2012

        American Geophysical Union (1980 to present)

        Marine Technology Society (FELLOW) (1995 to present); 
        President-Elect 2013-2014, and 2017-2018; President 2019-2020; 
        Past President 2021 to present

        The Oceanography Society (1987 to present)

        Institute of Marine Engineering, Science and Technology (FELLOW 
        and Chartered Marine Scientist) (2003 to present)

        Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (2019 to 
        present)

    13. Have you ever been a candidate for and/or held a public office 
(elected, non-elected, or appointed)? If so, indicate whether any 
campaign has any outstanding debt, the amount, and whether you are 
personally liable for that debt.

        Appointed by President Barack Obama as Chief Scientist of NOAA, 
        2014-2016

    14. List all memberships and offices held with and services 
rendered to, whether compensated or not, any political party or 
election committee within the past ten years. If you have held a paid 
position or served in a formal or official advisory position (whether 
compensated or not) in a political campaign within the past ten years, 
identify the particulars of the campaign, including the candidate, year 
of the campaign, and your title and responsibilities.

        Volunteered as scientific advisor to Presidential Campaigns for 
        Pete Buttigieg and Joseph R. Biden in 2020

    15. Itemize all political contributions to any individual, campaign 
organization, political party, political action committee, or similar 
entity of $200 or more for the past ten years.

        Biden for President--May 7, 2020--$250.00

    16. List all scholarships, fellowships, honorary degrees, honorary 
society memberships, military medals, and any other special recognition 
for outstanding service or achievements.

        Honorable Mention, Association Trends Publications Awards for 
        Professional Journals, 2000

        Presidential Meritorious Rank Award, United States of America 
        President George W. Bush, 2003

        Distinguished Civilian Service Award (highest award given to a 
        civilian), United States Navy, 2003

        Fellow, Institute of Marine Engineering, Science and 
        Technology, London, UK, 2007

        Fellow, The American Meteorological Society, 2007 Fellow, 
        Marine Technology Society, 2008

        General Counsel Award, National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
        Administration, 2005 and 2009

        Presidential Distinguished Rank Award, United States of America 
        President Barack H. Obama, 2009

        Alumni Fellow Award, Oregon State University, 2010

        Admiral James D. Watkins Honorary Lecture Inaugural Lecturer, 
        Marine Technology Society, 2010

        Lifetime Achievement Award, Oceanology International, 2014

        Honorary Co-Chair (with Congressman Sam Farr), OCEANS '15 
        Conference, Washington, DC, 2015

        Fellow, The Oceanography Society, 2019

    17. Please list each book, article, column, Internet blog posting, 
or other publication you have authored, individually or with others. 
Include a link to each publication when possible. Also list any 
speeches that you have given on topics relevant to the position for 
which you have been nominated. Do not attach copies of these 
publications unless otherwise instructed.
Publications:
        Spinrad, R.W. 1978. Experimental and theoretical measurements 
        of the volume scattering function at near-forward angles. M.S. 
        thesis. Oregon State University, Corvallis.

        *Spinrad, R.W., J.R.V. Zaneveld and H. Pak. 1978. Volume 
        scattering function of suspended particulate matter at near-
        forward angles: a comparison of experimental and theoretical 
        values. Appl. Optics 17:1125.

        Zaneveld, J.R.V., J.C. Kitchen, R. Bartz, D. Menzies, S. Moore, 
        R.W. Spinrad and H. Pak. 1978. Optical, hydrographic and 
        chemical observations in the Monterey Bay area during May and 
        September of 1977, Oregon State Univ. School of Ocean. Ref. 78-
        13.

        Spinrad, R.W. 1978. Measurements of the volume scattering 
        function at near-forward angles for suspended oceanic 
        particles. Proc. Soc. Photo-Opt. Instr. Eng. 160:18.

        *Spinrad, R.W., J.R.V. Zaneveld and H. Pak. 1979. Irradiance 
        and beam transmittance measurements off the West Coast of the 
        Americas. J. Geophys., Res. 84*:355.

        Zaneveld, J.R.V., R.W. Spinrad and D.W. Menzies. 1979. Optical 
        and hydrographic observations in the Congo River and Angola 
        Basin in May of 1978. Oregon State Univ. School of Ocean. Ref. 
        79-3.

        Zaneveld, J.R.V., R.W. Spinrad and R. Bartz, 1979. Optical 
        properties of turbidity standards. Proc. Soc. Photo-Opt. Instr. 
        Eng. 208:159

        *Zaneveld, J.R.V. and R.W. Spinrad, 1980. An arctangent model 
        of irradiance in the sea. J. Geophys. Res. 85:4919

        Spinrad, R.W. 1982. Optical characteristics of the suspended 
        sediment in the high energy benthic boundary layer experiment. 
        Ph.D. thesis. Oregon State University, Corvallis.

        *Zaneveld, J.R.V., R.W. Spinrad and R. Bartz. 1982. An optical 
        settling tube for the determination of particle size 
        distributions. Mar. Geol. 49:357.

        *Spinrad, R.W. and J.R.V. Zaneveld. 1982. An analysis of the 
        optical features of the near bottom and bottom nepheloid layers 
        in the area of the Scotian Rise. J. Geophys. Res. 87:9553.

        *Spinrad, R.W., J.R.V. Zaneveld and J.C. Kitchen. 1983. A study 
        of the optical characteristics of the suspended particles in 
        the benthic nepheloid layer of the Scotian Rise. J. Geophys. 
        Res. 88:7641.

        *Yentsch, C.M., P.K. Horan, K. Muirhead, Q. Dortch, E.M. 
        Haugen, L. Legendre, L.S. Murphy, M.J. Perry, D. Phinney, S.D. 
        Pomponi, R.W. Spinrad, A.M. Woods, C.S. Yentsch and B.J. 
        Zahuranec. 1983. Flow cytometry and cell sorting: a technique 
        for analysis and sorting of aquatic particles. Limnol. 
        Oceanogr. 28*:1275

        Spinrad, R.W. 1984. Flow cytometric analysis of the optical 
        characteristics of marine particulates. Proc. Soc. Photo-Opt. 
        Instr. Eng. 489:335.

        *Pak, H., J.R.V. Zaneveld and R.W. Spinrad. 1984. Vertical 
        distribution of suspended particulate matter in the Zaire 
        River, estuary and plume. Neth. 1. Sea Res. 17:412.

        *Spinrad, R.W, 1986. An optical study of the water masses of 
        the Gulf of Maine. J. Geophys. Res. 92:1007.

        *Spinrad, R.W. and J.F. Brown. 1986. Relative real refractive 
        index of marine microorganisms: A technique for flow cytometric 
        estimation. Appl. Optics 25*:1930

        *Spinrad, R.W. 1986. A calibration diagram of specific beam 
        attenuation. J. Geophys. Res. 91:7761

        *Townsend, D.W. and R.W. Spinrad. 1986. Early spring 
        phytoplankton blooms in the Gulf of Maine. Cont. Shelf Res. 6

        *Codispoti, L.A., G.E. Friederich, T.T. Packard, H.E. Glover, 
        P.J. Kelley, R.W. Spinrad, R.T. Barber, J.J. Elkins, B.B. Ward, 
        F. Lipschultz, N. Lastaunau. 1986. High nitrite levels off 
        Northern Peru: a signal of instability in the marine 
        denitrification rate. Science. 233:1200

        Spinrad, R.W. 1986. Use of the specific beam attenuation 
        coefficient for identification of suspended particulate 
        material. Soc. Photo-Opt. Instr. Eng. Ocean Optics VIII 637: 
        135

        *Spinrad, R.W. and C.M. Yentsch. 1987. Observations on the 
        Intra-and Inter-specific Single Cell Optical Variability of 
        Marine Phytoplankton. Applied Optics. 26:357

        *Glover, H.E., M.D. Keller and R.W. Spinrad. 1987. The effects 
        of light quality and intensity on photosynthesis and growth of 
        marine eukaryotic and prokaryotic phytoplankton clones. J. Exp. 
        Mar. Ecol. 105:137

        *Yentsch, C.M. and R.W. Spinrad. 1987. Particles in flow, Mar. 
        Tech. Society Journal. 21:58.

        *Campbell, D.E. and R.W. Spinrad. 1987. The relationship 
        between light attenuation and particle characteristics in a 
        turbid estuary. Est. Coast and Shelf Sci. 25:53

        Spinrad, R.W. 1987. Testing of optical properties and 
        development of application procedures for OMP-8 antifoulant on 
        submersible optical surfaces. Sea Tech Inc. Ref. Tech. Report 
        8701. 44pp.

        *Ackleson, S.G., R.W. Spinrad, C.M. Yentsch, J. Brown and W. 
        Korjeff-Bellows. 1988. Phytoplankton optical properties: now 
        cytometric examinations of dilution-induced effects. Applied 
        Optics. 27:1262

        *Ackleson, S.G. and R.W. Spinrad. 1988. Size and refractive 
        index of individual marine particulates: a flow cytometric 
        approach. Applied Optics. 27:1270.

        Bartz, R., R.W. Spinrad and J.C. Kitchen. 1988. A low power 
        high resolution, in situ fluorometer for profiling and moored 
        applications. Proc. Soc. Photo-Opt. Instr. Eng. Ocean Optics 
        IX. 925:157

        Spinrad, R.W 1988. Optical oceanography: the state of the 
        science. Oceanography, 1:22

        Dortch, Q., D.W. Townsend, R.W. Spinrad, and L.M. Mayer. 1988. 
        The Role of Nepheloid Layers in Benthic-Pelagic Coupling. 
        National Undersea Res. Prog. Research Report 88-3, 1. Babb and 
        M. De Luca, editors, pp. 181-203

        *Spinrad, R.W., R. Bartz and J.C. Kitchen. 1989. In situ 
        measurement of marine particle settling velocity and size 
        distributions using the remote optical settling tube. J. 
        Geophys. Res. 94:93 1.

        *Spinrad, R.W., H. Glover, B.B. Ward, L. Codispoti and G. 
        Kullenberg. 1989. Suspended Particle and Bacterial Maxima in 
        Peruvian Coastal Waters during a Cold Water Anomaly. Deep Sea 
        Research. 36:715

        *Spinrad, R.W., C.M. Yentsch, J. Brown, Q. Dortch, E. Haugen, 
        N. Revelante, and L. Shapiro. 1989. The response of beam 
        attenuation to heterotrophic growth in a natural population of 
        phytoplankton. Limn. Oceanog. 34:1601

        Spinrad, R.W. 1989. Guest Editor, Limnology and Oceanography 
        Special Issue on Hydrologic Optics, Vol. 34 Number 8, pp. 1389-
        1766.

        Spinrad, R.W. 1989. Satellite Laser Communication Evaluation 
        Algorithm (SLCEVAL) Independent Validation and Verification: 
        Final Report. Spacetask #147-ONR-C-9-1-020. 50 pp.

        *Spinrad, R.W. 1989. Optical oceanography: The role of 
        microparticles in attenuation of marine light. Optics News. 
        Dec. 1989:51

        Spinrad, R.W. 1990. Editor, Ocean Optics X, SPIE v. 1302, 664 
        pp.,

        Spinrad, R.W. 1991. Editor, Underwater Imaging, Photog., and 
        Visibility, SPIE v.15:37, 222 pp.

        *Townsend, D.W., L.M. Mayer, Q. Dortch and R.W. Spinrad. 1992. 
        Vertical structure and biological activity in the bottom 
        nepheloid layer of the Gulf of Maine. Continental Shelf 
        Research 12:363-387.

        Spinrad, R.W. and E. Widder. 1992. Ship shadow measurements 
        from a manned submersible, Ocean Optics XI, SPIE v. 1750:372.

        *Spinrad, R.W. and J. Brown. 1993. Effects of asphericity on 
        single-particle polarized light scattering. Applied Optics. 
        32:6151.

        *Spinrad, R.W., K.L. Carder and M.J. Perry (eds.). 1994. Ocean 
        Optics, 283pp., Oxford University Press, New York

        Spinrad, R.W. 1994, Guest Editor, Oceanography Special Issue on 
        Technology Transfer, v.6. No.3. 144pp.

        Watkins, J.D. and R.W. Spinrad. 1996. Oceans 2000: Bridging the 
        Millennia--Partnerships for Stakeholders in the Oceans. 51pp. 
        Consortium for Oceanographic Research and Education. 
        Washington, DC.

        Watkins, J.D. and R.W. Spinrad. 1996. An Ocean Community. Sea 
        Technology, March 1996, p.105

        *Spinrad, R.W. 1996 . The Oceanographic Text Pattern: a review 
        and comparison of introductory Oceanography texts. 
        Oceanography, 9:194.

        Spinrad, R.W. 1996. Ocean Optics: A Perspective and a 
        Prognosis. Ocean Optics XIII. SPIE v. 2963:

        *Spinrad, R.W. 1997. The National Oceanographic Partnership 
        Program: a commentary. Marine Technology Society Journal, 
        31(4): 77-78.

        *Schoedinger, S.E., R. W. Spinrad and A.R.M. Nowell. 1998. 
        Support for U.S. Graduate Education in the Ocean Sciences: Are 
        Research Assistantships Over-utilized as a Source of Funding?. 
        EOS Trans. American Geophys. Union, 79(5): 57,61,64.

        *Nikolaus, R.L. and R.W. Spinrad. 1998. The Impact of Major 
        Ocean Research Programs on Ocean Science Education. Marine 
        Technology Society Journal, 32(3):60-67

        West, Richard D. and R.W. Spinrad. 2000. Strategy for Research 
        and Development: Roadmap to a Vision for Operational 
        Oceanography

        Rogers, David P., Mary G. Altalo and Richard W. Spinrad. 2002. 
        Marine Information for Shipping and Defense. In ``Oceans 2020: 
        Science, Trends and the Challenge of Sustainability'', Edited 
        by J. G. Field, G. Hempel, and C.P. Summerhayes. Island Press.

        Spinrad, R.W. 2002, An Oceanographic Commitment to Homeland 
        Security, Sea Technology, 43:56

        Spinrad, R.W. 2004, One System, Seven Goals and Oceans of Data, 
        Sea Technology, 45:4

        Moore, Berrien, R. Rosen, A. Rosenberg, R. Spinrad, W. 
        Washington, R. West. 2004, NOAA Research Review Report, http://
        www.sab.noaa.gov/Reports/RRT
        _Report-080604.pdf

        Spinrad, R.W. 2006, The Evolution and Revolution of Ocean 
        Science and Technology, Marine Technology Society Journal, 40

        Leinen, M., R.W. Spinrad, and J.D. Walker. 2007. Charting the 
        Course for Ocean Science in the United States in the Next 
        Decade, An Ocean Research Priorities Plan and Implementation 
        Strategy, National Science and Technology Council, Office of 
        Science and Technology Policy, Executive Office of the 
        President, 84pp., https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/
        default/files/micro
        sites/ostp/nstc-orppis.pdf

        Spinrad, R.W., contributor. 2007. Hidden Depths: Atlas of the 
        Ocean, Smithsonian:HarperCollins, ISBN 9780061345142, 256pp.

        Spinrad, R.W., contributor. 2008. Ocean: An Illustrated Atlas, 
        National Geographic, ISBN 978-1-4262-0319-0, 351pp.

        Watkins, J.D., T. Schaff and R. Spinrad. 2009. A History of the 
        National Oceanographic Partnership Program, Oceanography

        *Spinrad, R. W., National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
        Administration: A Lot More Than Your Nickel's Worth, Marine 
        Technology Society Journal, V. 49, No. 2, pp 8-9, 2015

        Spinrad, R. W., F. Orr, E. Stofan, L. A. Tabak, C. E. Wotecki, 
        Chief Scientists: U.S. Can Remain Innovation Leader in 
        Science's `Endless Frontier', http://www.huffingtonpost.com/dr-
        richard-w-spinrad/chief-scientists-us-can-r_b_7948
        522.html, 2015

        Spinrad, R.W. and I. Boyd, Our Deadened, Carbon-soaked Seas, 
        The New York Times, October 15, 2015, https://www.nytimes.com/
        2015/10/16/opinion/our-deadened-carbon-soaked-seas.html

        Spinrad, R.W., The warming Arctic: Remote but not isolated, 
        NOAA Blog, December 29, 2015, https://medium.com/@NOAA/the-
        warming-arctic-6e1045c
        34457

        *Briscoe, M., D. Glickson, S. Roberts, R. Spinrad, and J. 
        Yoder. A moving target: Matching graduate education with 
        available careers for ocean scientists. Oceanography 29(1):22-
        30, http://dx.doi.org/10.5670/oceanog.2016.05. 2016

        *Spinrad, R. W. The new blue economy: A vast oceanic frontier, 
        Eos, 97, doi:10.1029/2016EO053793. 08 June 2016.

        Spinrad, R.W., We can live better by learning from our oceans, 
        Miami Herald, July 6, 2016, https://www.miamiherald.com/
        opinion/op-ed/article88120617
        .html

        Spinrad, R.W., NOAA Chief Scientist Report, https://
        research.noaa.gov/sites/oar/Documents/External_Affairs/ 
        NOAA_CSAR_2016_28Dec2016.pdf, 2016.

        *Spinrad, R.W., Ocean Economic Potential, Marine Technology 
        Society Journal, V. 52, No. 5, pp 17-18, 2018.

        Hotaling, L., and R.W. Spinrad, The New Blue Economy: 
        Workforce, Programs, and Policies. Elsevier Publishers. In 
        press, 2021.
Blog Postings:
        Personal blog at rickspinrad.com
Speeches (since 2014):
        A Chief Scientist's Perspective, 7th Biennial EPP Education and 
        Science Forum, 10/27/14

        Blue is the New Green, 6th Annual Maritime Gala, 11/12/14 
        Tracking a Changing Climate, The Wilson Center, 11/18/14

        NOAA and Argos Wildlife Tracking, International Argos User 
        Conference, 11/20/14

        The Big Challenges, National Center for Science and the 
        Environment, 1/27/15

        Designing a Carbon Observing System, 5th N. American Carbon 
        Program, 1/28/15

        NOAA as the Nation's Environmental Agency, 2015

        How Ocean Knowledge Changes the World, National Marine 
        Educators Association, 2015

        NOAA's Research and Development Enterprise, Maryland Space 
        Business Roundtable, 1/20/15

        The Role of Long-Term Science in Building Resilience in the 
        Gulf of Mexico Region, 2/17/15

        Corporate View of NOAA, National Association of Marine Labs, 3/
        2/15

        Ocean Exploration, Aquatic Academy, 3/3/15

        How resilience fits in NOAA priorities, Sea Grant Week, 3/4/15

        Oceanography Saved the World, Nifty Fifty Program, 3/12/15

        Ocean Observations, Predictions and the New Blue Economy, 5/1/
        15

        NOAA Programs, Goddard Earth Sciences Technology and Research, 
        5/26/15

        Mission-optimized Research at NOAA, CYGNSS Applications 
        Workshop, 5/28/15

        My Career as an Oceanography. GESTAR MANIAC talk, 6/1/15

        You Are Citizen Science, Climate Stewards Education Webinar, 6/
        2/15

        Frontiers in Marine Biology, Japan Society for the Promotion of 
        Science, 6/12/15

        Prediction Challenges in a Dynamic Arctic, 6th Symposium on the 
        Impacts of an Ice-Diminishing Arctic on Naval and Maritime 
        Operations, 7/14/15

        How Oceanography Saved the World, Hatfield Marine Science 
        Center 50th Anniversary Celebration remarks, 8/7/15

        Making Science Matter, FDA Science & Research Conference, 8/13/
        15 Future of Oceans, XPrize Awards program, 7/20/15

        Power of Ocean Data, XPRIZE Workshop, 10/19/15

        Marine Technology: A Key to Future Opportunities, OCEANS '15, 
        10/20/15

        Ocean Science Visions, Consortium for Ocean Leadership, 10/28/
        15

        Making Science Matter, U. Md. Earth System Science 
        Interdisciplinary Center, 11/9/15

        Opening Remarks, UNEP Global Program of Action for the 
        Protection of the Marine Environment from Land-Based Activities 
        Conference, 11/17/15

        US Partnerships for Health Sector Resilience, U.S. COP-21 Side 
        Event, 12/2/15

        NOAA's Research and Development Enterprise, American 
        Geophysical Union, 12/14/15

        Understanding Weather and Climate Related Risks, Pew Project on 
        National Security, Energy, and Climate, 1/25/16

        NOAA's Research and Development Enterprise, Ocean Sciences 
        Meeting, 2/22/16

        Pennsylvania Sea Grant Designation, 4/1/16

        Making Ocean Science Matter, Rutgers University, 4/6/16

        NOAA's Research and Development Enterprise, American 
        Meteorological Society, 4/14/16

        Environment and Geospatial Information, GEOBuiz, 4/26/16

        NOAA's Research and Development Enterprise, Ocean Studies 
        Board, 4/27/16

        The Importance of Effective Transition and a Unified Modeling 
        Framework, Ecological Forecasting Roadmap Annual Meeting, 4/27/
        16

        Water Intelligence: what do we need and what can it tell us?, 
        WEF Great Water Cities Summit, 5/11/16

        How Oceanography Saved the World, Nifty Fifty, 6/1/16

        Launching NOAA Ocean Research, National Marine Educators 
        Association, 6/27/16

        Weather research, Deutscher Wetterdienst, 9/4/16

        NOAA Climate Research, GEOMAR, Leibniz Baltic Research, 9/5/16

        NOAA Climate Research, Institute for Advanced Sustainability 
        Studies, Potsdam, 9/6/16

        The New Blue Economy, MTS Oceans '16, 9/25/16

        Ocean Fun Facts, NYC Submerge Marine Festival, 9/26/16

        The Oceans Future, PICES, 11/7/16

        Sustaining Ocean Observations, National Academy of Sciences, 
        11/16/16

        History of the National Ocean Sciences Bowl, Oregon State 
        University, 4/21/17

        Innovation in Coastal Science, State of the Coast Conference, 
        10/28/17

        Emerging Opportunities and Challenges in Ocean Technology, 
        STRONGMAR Conference, Porto, Portugal, 11/16/17

        We Are All Scientists, PIELC Conference, Eugene, OR, 3/1/18

        Food From the Sea: The Pull and the Push, Food From the Sea 
        Conference, Newport, OR, 4/19/18

        The Push and the Pull of Marine Technology, OCEANS '18, Kobe, 
        Japan, 5/29/18

        Innovations in Marine Technology, Northwest Marine Technology 
        Summit, Newport, OR, 10/11/18

        How Oceanography Saved the World, Sisters Science Club, 
        Sisters, OR, 9/24/19

        Autonomous vehicles, AUVSI Cascade Chapter, Pendleton, OR, 10/
        2/19

        The Push and the Pull of Marine Technology, Singapore 
        University, 10/21/19

        Dangers of the Sea, Sisters Rotary, Sisters, OR, 6/18/20

        Leadership Seminar, Northwest Fisheries Science Center (via 
        Zoom), 7/8/20

        Promoting a Vibrant Sustainable Blue Economy, Blue Tech Week 
        (via Zoom), 11/20/20

        The New Blue Economy, U. Alaska College of Fisheries and Oceans 
        Keynote Lecture (via Zoom), 12/3/20

        The Push and Pull of Marine Technology, ICL Lecture (via Zoom), 
        3/11/21

    18. List all digital platforms (including social media and other 
digital content sites) on which you currently or have formerly operated 
an account, regardless of whether or not the account was held in your 
name or an alias. Include the name of an ``alias'' or ``handle'' you 
have used on each of the named platforms. Indicate whether the account 
is active, deleted, or dormant. Include a link to each account if 
possible.

        Facebook (Rick Spinrad)

        Blog--rickspinrad.com

        Twitter (@SpinradRick)

        LinkedIn (Richard (Rick) Spinrad)

    19. Please identify each instance in which you have testified 
orally or in writing before Congress in a governmental or non-
governmental capacity and specify the date and subject matter of each 
testimony.

        February 26, 2004 to House Subcommittee on Water Resources and 
        Environment, regarding FY 2005 budget request: https://
        books.google.com/books?id=76
        QqAAAAMAAJ&pg=PA60&lpg=PA60_&dq=February+26+2004+Spinrad+NOAA
        +testimony&source=bl&ots=OAx_8_wfWj&sig=ACfU3U2WkRCwXJJBzNkBN8A
        0bXWpW0kHxw&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwicseCsxuzvAhUKu54KHSh-BOsQ
        6AEwAHoECAEQAw-
        v=onepage&q=February_26_2004_Spinrad_NOAA_testimo
        ny&f=false

        July 13, 2004 to House Subcommittee on Resources, regarding 
        ocean observing systems: https://www.congress.gov/108/chrg/
        CHRG-108hhrg94997/CHRG-108
        hhrg94997.pdf

        February 16, 2005 to House Subcommittee on Water Resources and 
        the Environment, regarding FY 2006 budget request: https://
        www.legislative.noaa.gov/Testimony/spinrad021605.pdf

        April 19, 2005 to House Subcommittee on Fisheries and Oceans, 
        regarding H.R. 1489, ``Coastal Ocean Observing System 
        Integration and Implementation Act of 2005'': https://
        www.legislative.noaa.gov/Testimony/spinrad041905.pdf

        May 4, 2006 to House Subcommittee on Fisheries and Oceans, 
        regarding H.R. 3835, ``To establish a coordinated national 
        ocean exploration program within the National Oceanic and 
        Atmospheric Administration'': https://www
        .legislative.noaa.gov/Testimony/spinrad050406.pdf

        July 27, 2006 to House Committee on Science, regarding H.R. 
        3835, ``To establish a coordinated national ocean exploration 
        program within the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
        Administration'': https://www.legislative.noaa.gov/Testimony/
        spinrad072706.pdf

        April 3, 2008 to House Subcommittee on Fisheries, Wildlife and 
        Oceans, NOAA's National Sea Grant College Program: https://
        www.legislative.noaa.gov
        /Testimony/Spinrad040308.pdf

        July 28, 2009 to Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
        Transportation, regarding hurricane research: https://
        www.legislative.noaa.gov/Testimony/Spinrad072809.pdf

    20. Given the current mission, major programs, and major 
operational objectives of the department/agency to which you have been 
nominated, what in your background or employment experience do you 
believe affirmatively qualifies you for appointment to the position for 
which you have been nominated, and why do you wish to serve in that 
position?
    Education--I am formally educated in earth sciences, having 
received my undergraduate degree, Master's and Ph.D. in oceanography. 
In addition, I am certified as a Chartered Marine Scientist by the 
Institute of Marine Engineering, Science and Technology.
    Experience--I have spent the last 40 years working in ocean, 
atmosphere, and climate science and policy. As a working scientist I 
have published over 70 scientific articles, papers, book chapters, and 
opinion pieces. I have worked in 5 offices of 3 Federal agencies, 
managing research programs, where, in aggregate, I have had acquisition 
authority for approximately $4B of Federal funding. In those offices, I 
also have developed major policies and supervised thousands of Federal 
employees and contractors. I have served in leading roles for major 
interagency efforts, reporting directly to the Executive Office of the 
President. I have also worked in the private sector, having been 
President of a start-up oceanographic instrumentation firm. I have 
served as a research assistant, senior faculty (Professor with tenure), 
and senior administrator (Vice President for Research) in academia, at 
three different major universities.
    Recognition--I am recognized as an expert in the technical fields 
directly associated with NOAA's mission, as reflected by my having 
served as President of The Oceanography Society and the Marine 
Technology Society, as well as serving on the governing Council of the 
American Meteorological Society. Further reflecting my stature in the 
scientific community, I have been elected a Fellow of 4 professional 
societies.
    21. What do you believe are your responsibilities, if confirmed, to 
ensure that the department/agency has proper management and accounting 
controls, and what experience do you have in managing a large 
organization?
    My responsibilities will be to advance the mission of the agency, 
and develop the programs, budgets, and policies to accomplish the 
components of that mission. Further, I believe I would be authorized to 
do so by overseeing the efficient and effective management of the 
respective organizations (e.g., the National Marine Fisheries Service 
and National Weather Service, etc.) within NOAA, and I am compelled to 
do so in a just, equitable, and inclusive manner, advancing an agenda 
that fosters an increasingly diverse and representative workforce.
    I have led and provided vision, leadership and management acumen in 
my serving as the NOAA Assistant Administrator for the National Ocean 
Service, with a workforce of approximately 1200 government employees, 
and a budget of roughly $400M per year. I also restructured and led the 
growth of NOAA's Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research as its 
Assistant Administrator, having supervisory responsibilities for more 
than 1000 government employees, and a budget of roughly $400M per year.
    I would note that for these roles I received the highest level of 
recognition in the Senior Executive Service (Distinguished Executive) 
from President Barack Obama.
    22. What do you believe to be the top three challenges facing the 
department/agency, and why?
    The first challenge will be developing a full portfolio of 
environmental products and services, especially in the context of 
changing climate. Every aspect of society will be impacted by the 
existential threat of climate change, and as such it is incumbent on 
the Federal government to provide the highest quality, most accurate 
knowledge and information about the oceans, atmosphere, biosphere, and 
cryosphere and how they will change in the months, years, and decades 
to come. NOAA is the authoritative source for these products and 
services, and the agency's record in providing weather, ocean, climate, 
and fisheries information positions NOAA as the logical focal point for 
building the portfolio of climate products and services the Nation 
needs. Importantly, such an effort will require an extraordinary level 
of coordination and cooperation, not only with NOAA's sister 
environmentally-oriented agencies, but also with industry, academia, 
NGOs, and philanthropic sponsors.
    The second high-level challenge will be to build a balanced 
portfolio of programs and policies that both enhance environmental 
sustainability and foster economic development. The false argument that 
conservation threatens financial growth must be obviated by programs in 
renewable energy, improved infrastructure, sustainable agriculture/
fisheries, and restorative aquaculture--for example--which take best 
advantage of ``environmental intelligence'' and skillful predictions of 
how the environment might change under different conditions. I have 
been a strong advocate of the New Blue Economy--an economy based on 
data and information, around which sustainable economic growth can be 
developed. NOAA is well positioned within the Department of Commerce to 
take a leadership role in developing this New Blue Economy.
    The third priority is associated with the future of the United 
States' scientific and technical workforce. NOAA employs large numbers 
of scientists and technologists, and, perhaps even more impactfully, 
educates and trains many of our future professionals. As such, NOAA has 
an important responsibility to ensure that the workforce of the future 
is both well-trained, and appropriately representative of the American 
populace. Statistics show that the scientific and technical workforce 
in the environmental fields in the U.S. is woefully non-diverse. NOAA 
must embrace its leadership role in creating a more just, equitable, 
diverse, and inclusive workforce.
                   b. potential conflicts of interest
    1. Describe all financial arrangements, deferred compensation 
agreements, and other continuing dealings with business associates, 
clients, or customers. Please include information related to retirement 
accounts.
    Professor, Oregon State University. I will retire from my faculty 
position upon confirmation of my appointment to the NOAA Administrator 
position. I am also vested in the Oregon Public Employees Retirement 
System.
    I have a retirement account with TIAA-CREF from my employment with 
the Consortium for Oceanographic Research and Education in the 1990s.
    I serve in a paid consulting capacity with the Schmidt Ocean 
Institute as a member of their Science Advisory Board.
    I am the principal and founder of my consulting firm, High Desert 
Ocean Associates, LLC.
    I am a principal and co-founder (with one other co-founder) of a 
consulting firm, Oceans 360 Associates, LLC.
    I have no deferred compensation agreements.
    2. Do you have any commitments or agreements, formal or informal, 
to maintain employment, affiliation, or practice with any business, 
association or other organization during your appointment? If so, 
please explain.
    I have no commitments or agreements, formal or informal, to 
maintain employment, affiliation, or practice with any business, 
association or other organization during my prospective government 
service.
    3. Indicate any investments, obligations, liabilities, or other 
relationships which could involve potential conflicts of interest in 
the position to which you have been nominated. Explain how you will 
resolve each potential conflict of interest.
    In connection with the nomination process, I have consulted with 
the Office of Government Ethics and the Designated Agency Ethics 
Official at the Department of Commerce to identify any potential 
conflict of interest. Any conflict of interest will be resolved 
according to the terms of an ethics agreement that I have entered into 
with the Commerce Department's Designated Agency Ethics Official and 
that will be provided to this Committee. In the event that an actual or 
potential conflict of interest arises during my appointment, I will 
consult with the Commerce Department's ethics counsel and take the 
measures necessary to resolve the conflict.
    4. Describe any business relationship, dealing, or financial 
transaction which you have had during the last ten years, whether for 
yourself, on behalf of a client, or acting as an agent, that could in 
any way constitute or result in a possible conflict of interest in the 
position to which you have been nominated. Explain how you will resolve 
each potential conflict of interest.
    In connection with the nomination process, I have consulted with 
the Office of Government Ethics and the Designated Agency Ethics 
Official at the Department of Commerce to identify any potential 
conflict of interest. Any conflict of interest will be resolved 
according to the terms of an ethics agreement that I have entered into 
with the Commerce Department's Designated Agency Ethics Official and 
that will be provided to this Committee. In the event that an actual or 
potential conflict of interest arises during my appointment, I will 
consult with the Commerce Department's ethics counsel and take the 
measures necessary to resolve the conflict.
    5. Identify any other potential conflicts of interest, and explain 
how you will resolve each potential conflict of interest.
    In connection with the nomination process, I have consulted with 
the Office of Government Ethics and the Designated Agency Ethics 
Official at the Department of Commerce to identify any potential 
conflict of interest. Any conflict of interest will be resolved 
according to the terms of an ethics agreement that I have entered into 
with the Commerce Department's Designated Agency Ethics Official and 
that will be provided to this Committee. In the event that an actual or 
potential conflict of interest arises during my appointment, I will 
consult with the Commerce Department's ethics counsel and take the 
measures necessary to resolve the conflict.
    6. Describe any activity during the past ten years, including the 
names of clients represented, in which you have been engaged for the 
purpose of directly or indirectly influencing the passage, defeat, or 
modification of any legislation or affecting the administration and 
execution of law or public policy. None.
                            c. legal matters
    1. Have you ever been disciplined or cited for a breach of ethics, 
professional misconduct, or retaliation by, or been the subject of a 
complaint to, any court, administrative agency, the Office of Special 
Counsel, professional association, disciplinary committee, or other 
professional group? Yes.
    If yes:

    a. Provide the name of agency, association, committee, or group;
    I was a subject of a discrimination complaint by an employee of the 
NOAA Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research in 2009.

    b. Provide the date the citation, disciplinary action, complaint, 
or personnel action was issued or initiated;
    I do not know the specific date of the complaint, but I believe it 
was 2009.

    c. Describe the citation, disciplinary action, complaint, or 
personnel action;
    The complaint was that the employee had been detailed to another 
office at NOAA as a retaliatory action.

    d. Provide the results of the citation, disciplinary action, 
complaint, or personnel action.
    I am not certain of the results, as the case continued after my 
departure from government in 2010. I heard that the case was dismissed. 
No disciplinary action or personnel action was directed to me.

    2. Have you ever been investigated, arrested, charged, or held by 
any Federal, State, or other law enforcement authority of any Federal, 
State, county, or municipal entity, other than for a minor traffic 
offense? If so, please explain. No.
    3. Have you or any business or nonprofit of which you are or were 
an officer ever been involved as a party in an administrative agency 
proceeding, criminal proceeding, or civil litigation? If so, please 
explain. No.
    4. Have you ever been convicted (including pleas of guilty or nolo 
contendere) of any criminal violation other than a minor traffic 
offense? If so, please explain. No.
    5. Have you ever been accused, formally or informally, of sexual 
harassment or discrimination on the basis of sex, race, religion, or 
any other basis? If so, please explain.
    Other than the case indicated in answer to Question C.1, I have 
never been accused of harassment or discrimination.
    6. Please advise the Committee of any additional information, 
favorable or unfavorable, which you feel should be disclosed in 
connection with your nomination.
    I believe my record as a supervisor, and the ensuing success of my 
direct reports reflects my fair and unbiased support for those I work 
with, regardless of their race, color, religion, age, gender identity, 
sexual orientation, national origin, disability, marital status, status 
as a parent, or political affiliation.
                     d. relationship with committee
    1. Will you ensure that your department/agency complies with 
deadlines for information set by congressional committees, and that 
your department/agency endeavors to timely comply with requests for 
information from individual Members of Congress, including requests 
from members in the minority? Yes.
    2. Will you ensure that your department/agency does whatever it can 
to protect congressional witnesses and whistle blowers from reprisal 
for their testimony and disclosures? Yes.
    3. Will you cooperate in providing the Committee with requested 
witnesses, including technical experts and career employees, with 
firsthand knowledge of matters of interest to the Committee? Yes.
    4. Are you willing to appear and testify before any duly 
constituted committee of the Congress on such occasions as you may be 
reasonably requested to do so? Yes.
                                 ______
                                 
                               APPENDIX A
                   Richard W. Spinrad, Ph.D., CMarSci
Cleared for Top Secret information and granted access to Sensitive 
Compartmented Information based on Single Scope Background 
Investigation completed on 10/16/2015
                             Qualifications
Internationally recognized executive with over 35 years of multisector 
        experience in leading large organizations through change
   Technical Leadership: Directed and coordinated scientific 
        policy at highest levels (White House) of the Federal 
        government; Led research growth in a very high research 
        activity university (Carnegie classified RU/VH); Defined 
        environmental research priorities for team including Nobel 
        laureates in environmental science; Led the development of 
        Nation's first ever ocean research priorities; Established U.S. 
        Navy environmental research strategy

   Program Management and Advocacy: Directed over $4B of 
        Federal research programs; Co-wrote legislation for new Federal 
        environmental programs; Testified more than a dozen times 
        before U.S. Congress on budgetary and environmental issues; Led 
        development of international programs of record at the United 
        Nations Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission

   Administrative Expertise: Supervised thousands of employees 
        nationwide; Led the successful reorganization of 7 Federal 
        laboratories; Established first-ever University research 
        strategy; Recognized with highest level national awards and 
        commendation from peers and supervisors

   Research Innovation: Built highly successful programs for 
        industry support of academic research; Successfully competed 
        for grants from 4 Federal agencies; Published original research 
        in preeminent peer-reviewed journals; Awarded highest honors 
        from 3 international professional societies

   Teaching Experience: Served on faculty of 3 major 
        universities; Repeatedly evaluated as outstanding professor at 
        George Mason University; Advisee at U.S. Naval Academy awarded 
        the top student researcher award; Tenured Professor at Oregon 
        State University
                 Professional Experience (By Sector)\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \2\ Chronological listing follows
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                Academia
Senior Advisor to the Vice President for Research; Professor of 
Oceanography, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR: 10/17-Present 
(0.4 FTE)
Coordinate and oversee activities on major projects for the OSU 
Research Office. Specific focus is on development of matching funds for 
the $50M wave energy project from the U.S. Department of Energy, 
entitled PacWave.
Key Accomplishments: Raised nearly $10M of matching funds from 
government and private sources to facilitate construction and 
installation of the wave energy test site.

Vice President for Research, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR: 7/
10-6/14
Oversaw $300M sponsored research program in full spectrum of life, 
natural, physical, social sciences for 12 Colleges and 18 Centers/
Institutes. Lead all commercialization development and management of 
intellectual property. Served as Institutional Official, ensuring full 
compliance with safety and regulatory controls on sponsored research.
Key Accomplishments: Developed infrastructure for engaging industry 
with consequent 42 percent increase in commercially sponsored research 
in 2 years. Introduced first electronic research administration system 
for the University. Led first ever AAALAC accreditation for the 
University.

Adjunct Associate Professor, U.S. Naval Academy, Annapolis, MD.: 1/96-
6/99 (while at Consortium for Oceanographic Research and Education, 
CORE)
Lead supervisor of USNA Trident Scholar in oceanography. Supervised 
independent research studies of Naval Academy midshipmen, primarily in 
the area of optical oceanography.
Key Accomplishments: Advisee was awarded the coveted Harry E. Ward 
Trident Scholar prize

Adjunct Professor, George Mason University, Fairfax, VA.: 8/94-12/97 
(while at Office of Naval Research--ONR, and CORE)
Taught a 300-level course on Oceanography, involving development of 
curriculum and preparation/delivery of all lecture materials.
Key Accomplishments: Consistently rated as a top lecturer

Research Scientist, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences, West 
Boothbay Harbor, ME..:12/82-12/85
Wrote proposals for and performed federally funded basic research in 
oceanography (National Aeronautics and Space Administration, National 
Science Foundation, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration--
NOAA and ONR). Published results in peer-reviewed literature. Organized 
and participated in extensive field research cruises.
Key Accomplishments: Conducted leading research (published in peer-
reviewed literature) on ocean processes; Recipient of research grants 
from 4 Federal agencies
                               Government
 National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA; WASHINGTON, DC)
Chief Scientist: 7/14-12/16
Appointed by President Barack Obama to serve as NOAA's first Chief 
Scientist in nearly 20 years. Advise the Under Secretary of Commerce on 
agency research priorities and policies. Represent the Department at 
highest government level interagency, national and international 
committees, venues and forums. Build and establish policies and 
practices for managing, reviewing and enhancing the agency's research 
portfolio.
Key Accomplishments: Designed and promulgated the Agency's first ever 
Strategic Research Guidance Memorandum, the foundational document for 
ensuring corporate research portfolio management; built a rapid 
transition program and process for accelerating delivery of all 
research results into NOAA's operations, applications and 
commercialization; instituted several initiatives for recognizing the 
performance of agency scientists; re-engineered NOAA's $200M per year 
Cooperative Institute program to improve effectiveness of academic 
research support; produced first Chief Scientist's Annual Report for 
the agency

Assistant Administrator for Research (Senior Executive Service): 9/05-
4/10
Served as the head of research for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration (NOAA). Directed programmatic and budget authority over 
programs in oceanographic, atmospheric and climatological research. 
Supervision of a wide range of research sponsorship programs including 
ocean exploration, the National Sea Grant College Program and the 
Climate Program Office. Line supervisor for 7 NOAA laboratories around 
the United States, approximately 800 employees, and approximately $400M 
in program funds.
Key Accomplishments: Led the development of the first-ever U.S. ocean 
research priorities; Oversaw complete overhaul of NOAA Research; 
Established agency-wide policies for scientific integrity and 
independence; Sustained annual budget increases; recognized by Pres. 
Barack H. Obama with Presidential Rank Award

Assistant Administrator for Ocean Services and Coastal Zone Management 
(Senior Executive Service): 6/03-9/05
Served as the head of the National Ocean Service. Provided oversight of 
the United States Federal domestic ocean services and coastal zone 
management programs. Had direct programmatic and budget authority over 
programs in navigation services (e.g., National Geodetic Survey), 
resources (e.g., National Marine Sanctuaries Program), and coastal 
management (e.g., Office of Coastal Resource Management). Line 
supervisor for approximately 1200 employees, and approximately $700M in 
program funds.
Key Accomplishments: Negotiated U.S. position in establishing global 
tsunami warning system; established formal peer-recognition award for 
employees; Wrote key components of the Administration's Ocean Action 
Plan
                  United States Navy (WASHINGTON, DC)
Technical Director, Oceanographer of the Navy (Senior Executive 
Service): 3/99-5/03
Served as the senior civilian advisor to the U.S. Navy on operational 
oceanographic research and operations. Represented the U.S. Navy 
oceanographic, meteorological, and astronomical communities within the 
Defense Department and to interagency, and international organizations. 
Established the priorities for U.S. Navy investment in application of 
oceanographic products to fleet operations.
Key Accomplishments: Created program to accelerate transition of 
research into Naval operations; Helped lead establishment of office of 
the Navigator of the Navy; recognized by Pres. George W. Bush with 
Presidential Rank Award

Director, Ocean, Atmosphere & Space Modeling and Prediction Division, 
Office of Naval Research (ONR, (Senior Executive Service): 11/93-12/94
Serve as Principal executive leading and managing all of the basic and 
applied research and development (R&D) in oceanographic, meteorological 
and space-based modeling and prediction for the U.S. Navy. Total direct 
management authority was approximately $150M and 45 personnel. 
Administrated procurements in these R&D areas, and maintained full 
authority for program staffing and technical development.
Key Accomplishments: Created investment areas for Navy in shallow water 
oceanography, remote sensing and the use of autonomous vehicles

Director, Ocean Biology/Optics/Chemistry Division, Office of Naval 
Research (Senior Executive Service): 10/88-10/93
Responsible for providing leadership, staffing, coordination and 
direction for ONR's fundamental research programs in biological, 
optical and chemical oceanography (budget authority of approximately 
$20M) and recommending changes in program objectives and policies to 
the Director, Ocean Sciences Directorate.
Key Accomplishments: Initiated global leadership role for ONR in marine 
bioluminescence, ocean fertilization, and underwater optics

Program Manager, Ocean Optics Program, Office of Naval Research: 9/87-
9/88
Reviewed and managed extramural research grants, primarily supporting 
academic research institutions.
Key Accomplishments: Grew a program of annual spending from $0.5M to 
$10M in three years
                               Non-Profit
Executive Director for Research and Education, Consortium for 
Oceanographic Research and Education, Inc. (CORE), Washington, DC.: 12/
94-2/99
Coordinated all activities associated with research and education in 
marine sciences for a non-governmental organization (registered lobby), 
including the development (i.e., fundraising), performance and 
management of grant-or contract-funded efforts. Interacted on a regular 
basis with agency heads, institutional directors, members of Congress 
and their staffs. Served as first Director of National Oceanographic 
Partnership Program Office, overseeing the operations in support of the 
Interagency Working Group, and the National Ocean Research Leadership 
Council, chaired by the Secretary of the Navy.
Key Accomplishments: Wrote legislation for a National Ocean Partnership 
Program; Created the National Ocean Sciences Bowl
                                Industry
Principal and Founder, High Desert Ocean Associates, LLC, Bend, OR: 11/
17-Present
Conduct consulting on all aspects of environmental scientific 
operations, policy and programmatics. Clients include public and 
private sector agencies and firms.

Principal and Co-Founder, Oceans 360 Group, LLC, Seattle, WA: 12/17-
Present
Conduct consulting on all aspects of environmental scientific 
operations, policy and programmatics. Clients include public and 
private sector agencies and firms.

President, Sea Tech Inc, Corvallis, OR.: 1/86-8/87
Managed and directed all aspects of a small R&D firm, including 
initiating successful involvement in SBIR programs with Federal funding 
agencies. Sea Tech, Inc. was purchased in full by WetLabs, Inc. in 
1999.
Key Accomplishments: Developed commercial ocean fluorometer
               Professional Experience (Chronologically)
   Research Scientist, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences, 
        West Boothbay Harbor, ME.:12/82-12/85

   President, Sea Tech Inc., Corvallis, OR.: 1/86-8/87

   Program Manager, Ocean Optics Program, Office of Naval 
        Research (ONR): 9/87-9/88

   Director, Ocean Biology/Optics/Chemistry Division, ONR: 10/
        88-10/93

   Director, Ocean, Atmosphere & Space Modeling & Prediction 
        Division, ONR: 11/93-12/94

   Adjunct Professor, George Mason University, Fairfax, VA.: 8/
        94-12/97 (while at ONR and CORE)

   Executive Director, Consortium for Oceanographic Research 
        and Education (CORE), Washington, DC.:12/94-2/99

   Adjunct Associate Professor, US Naval Academy, Annapolis, 
        MD.: 1/96-6/99 (while at CORE)

   Technical Director, Oceanographer of the Navy: 3/99-5/03

   Assistant Administrator for Ocean Services and Coastal Zone 
        Management, NOAA: 6/03-9/05

   Assistant Administrator for Research, NOAA: 9/05-4/10

   Vice President for Research, Oregon State University, 
        Corvallis, OR: 7/10-6/14

   Chief Scientist (Presidential Appointment), NOAA, 
        Washington, DC: 7/14-12/16

   Senior Advisor to the Vice President for Research; Professor 
        of Oceanography, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR: 10/17-
        Present (0. 4 FTE)

   Principal and Founder, High Desert Ocean Associates, LLC, 
        Bend, OR: 11/17-Present

   Principal and Co-Founder, Oceans 360 Group, LLC, Seattle, 
        WA: 12/17-Present
                          Technical Strengths
Accomplished researcher in marine environmental studies; demonstrated 
leadership in design of sophisticated environmental instrumentation; 
innovator of National Ocean Sciences Bowl, a program for high school 
students; Successful program manager with significant annual growth in 
programs of responsibility at both Navy and NOAA; Globally sought 
public speaker with over 100 speeches and media appearances (print and 
broadcast including The New York Times, MSNBC, The Washington Post, 
Huffington Post, USA Today, Discovery Channel, The Weather Channel, 
BBC); prepared and delivered testimony to U.S. Congress and state 
legislature to increase budgets and improve programs in research and 
education; established record of program and policy development in 
economic development (including engagement with venture capital and 
angel investors)
                      Education and Certifications
B.A., Earth and Planetary Sciences, 1975--The Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD

M.S., Oceanography, 1978--Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR

Ph.D., Oceanography, 1982--Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR

Chartered Marine Scientist (CMarSCi, equivalent to professional 
certificate)--Institute of Marine Engineering, Science and Technology, 
London, UK

Top Secret Security Clearance--Additional information available on 
request
                           Honors and Awards
Honorable Mention, Association Trends Publications Awards for 
Professional Journals, 2000

Presidential Meritorious Rank Award, United States of America President 
George W. Bush, 2003

Distinguished Civilian Service Award (highest award given to a 
civilian), United States Navy, 2003

Fellow, Institute of Marine Engineering, Science and Technology, 
London, UK, 2007

Fellow, The American Meteorological Society, 2007

Fellow, Marine Technology Society, 2008

General Counsel Award, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 
2005 and 2009

Presidential Distinguished Rank Award, United States of America 
President Barack H. Obama, 2009

Alumni Fellow Award, Oregon State University, 2010

Admiral James D. Watkins Honorary Lecture Inaugural Lecturer, Marine 
Technology Society, 2010

Lifetime Achievement Award, Oceanology International, 2014

Honorary Co-Chair (with Congressman Sam Farr), OCEANS '15 Conference, 
Washington, DC, 2015

Fellow, The Oceanography Society, 2019
             Affiliations and Critical Professional Service
          American Association for the Advancement of Science
                American Meteorological Society (FELLOW)
     American Geophysical Union Marine Technology Society (FELLOW)
                        The Oceanography Society
  Institute of Marine Engineering, Science and Technology (FELLOW and 
                      Chartered Marine Scientist)
           Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
   Vice-Chair, U.S. National Committee for the Decade of Ocean 
        Science Sustainable Development, 2020-present

   Member, Schmidt Ocean Institute Advisory Board, 2020-present

   Member, Advisory Panel for Monterey Bay Aquarium Research 
        Institute, 2019-2020

   Member, Ocean Studies Board of the National Academies of 
        Sciences, Engineering and Medicine, 2019-present

   President, Marine Technology Society, 2019-2020

   Chair, Australian Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial 
        Research Organisation (CSIRO) Oceans and Atmosphere Business 
        Unit Review Panel, 2018

   Member, New Zealand Government National Science Challenge 
        Review Panelist: 1) The Deep South, and; 2) Sustainable Seas, 
        2018

   Member, Scientific Advisory Board, The Ocean Cleanup, 2017-
        present

   Member, Advisory Committee for the National Ocean Sciences 
        Bowl, Consortium for Ocean Leadership, 2017-present

   Member, Roundtable on Science and Technology for 
        Sustainability, National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and 
        Medicine, 2015-2016

   Member, Committee on Environment, Natural Resources and 
        Sustainability, National Science and Technology Council, White 
        House Office of Science and Technology Policy, 2014-2016

   Member, Committee on Science, National Science and 
        Technology Council, White House Office of Science and 
        Technology Policy, 2014-2016

   Council Member, Government-University-Industry Research 
        Roundtable, National Academies of Science, Engineering and 
        Medicine, 2014-2016

   President-Elect, Marine Technology Society, 2013-2014; 2017-
        2018

   President, Oregon Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Business 
        Enterprise, 2013-2014

   Member\3\, Ocean Research Advisory Panel Federal Advisory 
        Committee, 2013-2014
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \3\ Nominated and approved, service pre-empted by Presidential 
Appointment to NOAA

   Chair, Federal Advisory Committee on Integrated Ocean 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
        Observing Systems, 2012-2014

   Chair and Technical Advisor, Oregon Innovation Council, 
        Commercialized Research Committee, 2012-2014

   Commissioner, Corvallis Economic Development Commission, 
        2011-2014

   Board Member, Oregon Built Environment and Sustainable 
        Technology Signature Research Center, 2010-2014

   Board Member, Oregon Translational Research and Development 
        Institute, 2010-2014

   MEDEA, Advisory committee, 2010-2014

   Councilor, American Meteorological Society, 2009-2013

   President, The Oceanography Society, 2007-2009

   Member, Google Ocean Advisory Committee, 2007-2013

   Member, External Advisory Board, Center for Coastal Margin 
        Observation & Prediction, Oregon Health and Science University, 
        2006-2010

   Chair, NOAA Research Council, 2006-2010

   Permanent U.S. Representative (appointed by U.S. Department 
        of State), Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of the 
        United Nations, UNESCO, 2004-2007

   Co-Chair, White House Joint Subcommittee on Ocean Science 
        and Technology, of the Committee on Environment/Natural 
        Resources, of the National Science and Technology Council, 
        2003-2010

   Chair, NOAA Ocean Council, 2003-2005

   Member, Committee on NOAA/NASA Transitions of Research to 
        Operations, Space Studies Board, National Research Council, 
        National Academy of Sciences, 2001-2003

   Chair, Oceanology International Americas 2001 Conference

   Editor, McGraw-Hill Science Yearbook 2000

   Chair, Navy Technical Evaluation Team for WINDSAT program, 
        1999

   Editor-in-Chief, Oceanography Magazine, 1997-2003

   Member, National Visiting Comm., NSF Marine Advanced Tech. 
        Education Center, 1997-2000

   Board of Directors, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences 
        1994-2000

   Guest Editor, Special Focus Issue of Oceanography, 1994

   Editor, ``Ocean Optics'', Oxford University Press, 1994

   Chair and Editor, Ocean Optics X Symposium (SPIE), 1990

   Symposium Chair for Optical Society of America annual 
        meeting, 1989

   Member Tech. Advisory Group, Calgary City Dept. of Water 
        Works, 1989

   Guest Editor, Special Focus Issue of Limnology and 
        Oceanography, 1989

   Associate Editor, Oceanography Magazine, 1988-1997
                           Biographical note
    Having served as a canoe-tripping guide in Northern Ontario, as a 
college student, I've retained a love for outdoor activities all my 
life, and am an avid hiker (in fact, from March 2017 to May 2017 I 
completed a ``bucket list'' walk of 800 miles from Delaware to 
Indiana). Other diversionary activities include banjo-playing, 
woodworking (especially on large projects like roll-top desks and four-
poster beds), and, of late, collecting mechanical music machines. All 
this among a continually evolving menagerie of beagles, Labrador 
retrievers and cats.
                      Publications (* = refereed)
   1.  Spinrad, R.W. 1978. Experimental and theoretical measurements of 
        the volume scattering function at near-forward angles. M.S. 
        thesis. Oregon State University, Corvallis.

   2.  *Spinrad, R.W., J.R.V. Zaneveld and H. Pak. 1978. Volume 
        scattering function of suspended particulate matter at near-
        forward angles: a comparison of experimental and theoretical 
        values. Appl. Optics 17:1125.

   3.  Zaneveld, J.R.V., J.C. Kitchen, R. Bartz, D. Menzies, S. Moore, 
        R.W. Spinrad and H. Pak. 1978. Optical, hydrographic and 
        chemical observations in the Monterey Bay area during May and 
        September of 1977, Oregon State Univ. School of Ocean. Ref. 78-
        13.

   4.  Spinrad, R.W. 1978. Measurements of the volume scattering 
        function at near-forward angles for suspended oceanic 
        particles. Proc. Soc. Photo-Opt. Instr. Eng. 160:18.

   5.  *Spinrad, R.W., J.R.V. Zaneveld and H. Pak. 1979. Irradiance and 
        beam transmittance measurements off the West Coast of the 
        Americas. J. Geophys., Res. 84*:355.

   6.  Zaneveld, J.R.V., R.W. Spinrad and D.W. Menzies. 1979. Optical 
        and hydrographic observations in the Congo River and Angola 
        Basin in May of 1978. Oregon State Univ. School of Ocean. Ref. 
        79-3.

   7.  Zaneveld, J.R.V., R.W. Spinrad and R. Bartz, 1979. Optical 
        properties of turbidity standards. Proc. Soc. Photo-Opt. Instr. 
        Eng. 208:159

   8.  *Zaneveld, J.R.V. and R.W. Spinrad, 1980. An arctangent model of 
        irradiance in the sea. J. Geophys. Res. 85:4919

   9.  Spinrad, R.W. 1982. Optical characteristics of the suspended 
        sediment in the high energy benthic boundary layer experiment. 
        Ph.D. thesis. Oregon State University, Corvallis.

  10.  *Zaneveld, J.R.V., R.W. Spinrad and R. Bartz. 1982. An optical 
        settling tube for the determination of particle size 
        distributions. Mar. Geol. 49:357.

  11.  *Spinrad, R.W. and J.R.V. Zaneveld. 1982. An analysis of the 
        optical features of the near bottom and bottom nepheloid layers 
        in the area of the Scotian Rise. J. Geophys. Res. 87:9553.

  12.  *Spinrad, R.W., J.R.V. Zaneveld and J.C. Kitchen. 1983. A study 
        of the optical characteristics of the suspended particles in 
        the benthic nepheloid layer of the Scotian Rise. J. Geophys. 
        Res. 88:7641.

  13.  *Yentsch, C.M., P.K. Horan, K. Muirhead, Q. Dortch, E.M. Haugen, 
        L. Legendre, L.S. Murphy, M.J. Perry, D. Phinney, S.D. Pomponi, 
        R.W. Spinrad, A.M. Woods, C.S. Yentsch and B.J. Zahuranec. 
        1983. Flow cytometry and cell sorting: a technique for analysis 
        and sorting of aquatic particles. Limnol. Oceanogr. 28*:1275

  14.  Spinrad, R.W. 1984. Flow cytometric analysis of the optical 
        characteristics of marine particulates. Proc. Soc. Photo-Opt. 
        Instr. Eng. 489:335.

  15.  *Pak, H., J.R.V. Zaneveld and R.W. Spinrad. 1984. Vertical 
        distribution of suspended particulate matter in the Zaire 
        River, estuary and plume. Neth. 1. Sea Res. 17:412.

  16.  *Spinrad, R.W, 1986. An optical study of the water masses of the 
        Gulf of Maine. J. Geophys. Res. 92:1007.

  17.  *Spinrad, R.W. and J.F. Brown. 1986. Relative real refractive 
        index of marine microorganisms: A technique for flow cytometric 
        estimation. Appl. Optics 25*:1930

  18.  *Spinrad, R.W. 1986. A calibration diagram of specific beam 
        attenuation. J. Geophys. Res. 91:7761

  19.  *Townsend, D.W. and R.W. Spinrad. 1986. Early spring 
        phytoplankton blooms in the Gulf of Maine. Cont. Shelf Res. 6

  20.  *Codispoti, L.A., G.E. Friederich, T.T. Packard, H.E. Glover, 
        P.J. Kelley, R.W. Spinrad, R.T. Barber, J.J. Elkins, B.B. Ward, 
        F. Lipschultz, N. Lastaunau. 1986. High nitrite levels off 
        Northern Peru: a signal of instability in the marine 
        denitrification rate. Science. 233:1200

  21.  Spinrad, R.W. 1986. Use of the specific beam attenuation 
        coefficient for identification of suspended particulate 
        material. Soc. Photo-Opt. Instr. Eng. Ocean Optics VIII 637: 
        135

  22.  *Spinrad, R.W. and C.M. Yentsch. 1987. Observations on the 
        Intra-and Inter-specific Single Cell Optical Variability of 
        Marine Phytoplankton. Applied Optics. 26:357

  23.  *Glover, H.E., M.D. Keller and R.W. Spinrad. 1987. The effects 
        of light quality and intensity on photosynthesis and growth of 
        marine eukaryotic and prokaryotic phytoplankton clones. J. Exp. 
        Mar. Ecol. 105:137

  24.  *Yentsch, C.M. and R.W. Spinrad. 1987. Particles in flow, Mar. 
        Tech. Society Journal. 21:58.

  25.  *Campbell, D.E. and R.W. Spinrad. 1987. The relationship between 
        light attenuation and particle characteristics in a turbid 
        estuary. Est. Coast and Shelf Sci. 25:53

  26.  Spinrad, R.W. 1987. Testing of optical properties and 
        development of application procedures for OMP-8 antifoulant on 
        submersible optical surfaces. Sea Tech Inc. Ref. Tech. Report 
        8701. 44pp.

  27.  *Ackleson, S.G., R.W. Spinrad, C.M. Yentsch, J. Brown and W. 
        Korjeff-Bellows. 1988. Phytoplankton optical properties: now 
        cytometric examinations of dilution-induced effects. Applied 
        Optics. 27:1262

  28.  *Ackleson, S.G. and R.W. Spinrad. 1988. Size and refractive 
        index of individual marine particulates: a flow cytometric 
        approach. Applied Optics. 27:1270.

  29.  Bartz, R., R.W. Spinrad and J.C. Kitchen. 1988. A low power high 
        resolution, in situ fluorometer for profiling and moored 
        applications. Proc. Soc. Photo-Opt. Instr. Eng. Ocean Optics 
        IX. 925:157

  30.  Spinrad, R.W 1988. Optical oceanography: the state of the 
        science. Oceanography, 1:22

  31.  Dortch, Q., D.W. Townsend, R.W. Spinrad, and L.M. Mayer. 1988. 
        The Role of Nepheloid Layers in Benthic-Pelagic Coupling. 
        National Undersea Res. Prog. Research Report 88-3, 1. Babb and 
        M. De Luca, editors, pp. 181-203

  32.  *Spinrad, R.W., R. Bartz and J.C. Kitchen. 1989. In situ 
        measurement of marine particle settling velocity and size 
        distributions using the remote optical settling tube. J. 
        Geophys. Res. 94:93 1.

  33.  *Spinrad, R.W., H. Glover, B.B. Ward, L. Codispoti and G. 
        Kullenberg. 1989. Suspended Particle and Bacterial Maxima in 
        Peruvian Coastal Waters during a Cold Water Anomaly. Deep Sea 
        Research. 36:715

  34.  *Spinrad, R.W., C.M. Yentsch, J. Brown, Q. Dortch, E. Haugen, N. 
        Revelante, and L. Shapiro. 1989. The response of beam 
        attenuation to heterotrophic growth in a natural population of 
        phytoplankton. Limn. Oceanog. 34:1601

  35.  Spinrad, R.W. 1989. Guest Editor, Limnology and Oceanography 
        Special Issue on Hydrologic Optics, Vol. 34 Number 8, pp. 1389-
        1766.

  36.  Spinrad, R.W. 1989. Satellite Laser Communication Evaluation 
        Algorithm (SLCEVAL) Independent Validation and Verification: 
        Final Report. Spacetask #147-ONR-C-9-1-020. 50 pp.

  37.  *Spinrad, R.W. 1989. Optical oceanography: The role of 
        microparticles in attenuation of marine light. Optics News. 
        Dec. 1989:51

  38.  Spinrad, R.W. 1990. Editor, Ocean Optics X, SPIE v. 1302, 664 
        pp.,

  39.  Spinrad, R.W. 1991. Editor, Underwater Imaging, Photog., and 
        Visibility, SPIE v.15:37, 222 pp.

  40.  *Townsend, D.W., L.M. Mayer, Q. Dortch and R.W. Spinrad. 1992. 
        Vertical structure and biological activity in the bottom 
        nepheloid layer of the Gulf of Maine. Continental Shelf 
        Research 12:363-387.

  41.  Spinrad, R.W. and E. Widder. 1992. Ship shadow measurements from 
        a manned submersible, Ocean Optics XI, SPIE v. 1750:372.

  42.  *Spinrad, R.W. and J. Brown. 1993. Effects of asphericity on 
        single-particle polarized light scattering. Applied Optics. 
        32:6151.

  43.  *Spinrad, R.W., K.L. Carder and M.J. Perry (eds.). 1994. Ocean 
        Optics, 283pp., Oxford University Press, New York

  44.  Spinrad, R.W. 1994, Guest Editor, Oceanography Special Issue on 
        Technology Transfer, v.6. No.3. 144pp.

  45.  Watkins, J.D. and R.W. Spinrad. 1996. Oceans 2000: Bridging the 
        Millennia--Partnerships for Stakeholders in the Oceans. 51pp. 
        Consortium for Oceanographic Research and Education. 
        Washington, DC.

  46.  Watkins, J.D. and R.W. Spinrad. 1996. An Ocean Community. Sea 
        Technology, March 1996, p.105

  47.  *Spinrad, R.W. 1996 . The Oceanographic Text Pattern: a review 
        and comparison of introductory Oceanography texts. 
        Oceanography, 9:194.

  48.  Spinrad, R.W. 1996. Ocean Optics: A Perspective and a Prognosis. 
        Ocean Optics XIII. SPIE v. 2963:

  49.  *Spinrad, R.W. 1997. The National Oceanographic Partnership 
        Program: a commentary. Marine Technology Society Journal, 
        31(4): 77-78.

  50.  *Schoedinger, S.E., R. W. Spinrad and A.R.M. Nowell. 1998. 
        Support for U.S. Graduate Education in the Ocean Sciences: Are 
        Research Assistantships Over-utilized as a Source of Funding?. 
        EOS Trans. American Geophys. Union, 79(5): 57,61,64.

  51.  *Nikolaus, R.L. and R.W. Spinrad. 1998. The Impact of Major 
        Ocean Research Programs on Ocean Science Education. Marine 
        Technology Society Journal, 32(3):60-67

  52.  West, Richard D. and R.W. Spinrad. 2000. Strategy for Research 
        and Development: Roadmap to a Vision for Operational 
        Oceanography

  53.  Rogers, David P., Mary G. Altalo and Richard W. Spinrad. 2002. 
        Marine Information for Shipping and Defense. In ``Oceans 2020: 
        Science, Trends and the Challenge of Sustainability'', Edited 
        by J. G. Field, G. Hempel, and C.P. Summerhayes. Island Press.

  54.  Spinrad, R.W. 2002, An Oceanographic Commitment to Homeland 
        Security, Sea Technology, 43:56

  55.  Spinrad, R.W. 2004, One System, Seven Goals and Oceans of Data, 
        Sea Technology, 45:4

  56.  Moore, Berrien, R. Rosen, A. Rosenberg, R. Spinrad, W. 
        Washington, R. West. 2004, NOAA Research Review Report, http://
        www.sab.noaa.gov/ Reports/RRT_Report-080604.pdf

  57.  Spinrad, R.W. 2006, The Evolution and Revolution of Ocean 
        Science and Technology, Marine Technology Society Journal, 40

  58.  Leinen, M., R.W. Spinrad, and J.D. Walker. 2007. Charting the 
        Course for Ocean Science in the United States in the Next 
        Decade, An Ocean Research Priorities Plan and Implementation 
        Strategy, National Science and Technology Council, Office of 
        Science and Technology Policy, Executive Office of the 
        President, 84pp., https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/ sites/
        default/files/microsites/ostp/nstc-orppis.pdf

  59.  Spinrad, R.W., contributor. 2007. Hidden Depths: Atlas of the 
        Ocean, Smithsonian:HarperCollins, ISBN 9780061345142, 256pp.

  60.  Spinrad, R.W., contributor. 2008. Ocean: An Illustrated Atlas, 
        National Geographic, ISBN 978-1-4262-0319-0, 351pp.

  61.  Watkins, J.D., T. Schaff and R. Spinrad. 2009. A History of the 
        National Oceanographic Partnership Program, Oceanography

  62.  *Spinrad, R. W., National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
        Administration: A Lot More Than Your Nickel's Worth, Marine 
        Technology Society Journal, V. 49, No. 2, pp 8-9, 2015

  63.  Spinrad, R. W., F. Orr, E. Stofan, L. A. Tabak, C. E. Wotecki, 
        Chief Scientists: U.S. Can Remain Innovation Leader in 
        Science's 'Endless Frontier', http://www.huffingtonpost.com/dr-
        richard-w-spinrad/chief-scientists-us-can-r_b_7948522.html, 
        2015

  64.  Spinrad, R.W. and I. Boyd, Our Deadened, Carbon-soaked Seas, The 
        New York Times, October 15, 2015

  65.  Spinrad, R.W., The warming Arctic: Remote but not isolated, NOAA 
        Blog, December 15, 2015

  66.  *Briscoe, M., D. Glickson, S. Roberts, R. Spinrad, and J. Yoder. 
        A moving target: Matching graduate education with available 
        careers for ocean scientists. Oceanography 29(1):22-30, http://
        dx.doi.org/10.5670/oceanog.2016.05. 2016

  67.  *Spinrad, R. W. The new blue economy: A vast oceanic frontier, 
        Eos, 97, doi:10.1029/2016EO053793. 08 June 2016.

  68.  Spinrad, R.W., We can live better by learning from our oceans, 
        Miami Herald, 6 July, 2016.

  69.  Spinrad, R.W., NOAA Chief Scientist Report, https://
        research.noaa.gov/sites/oar/Documents/External_Affairs/
        NOAA_CSAR_2016_28Dec2016.pdf, 2016.

  70.  *Spinrad, R.W., Ocean Economic Potential, Marine Technology 
        Society Journal, V. 52, No. 5, pp 17-18, 2018.

  71.  Hotaling, L., and R.W. Spinrad, The New Blue Economy: Workforce, 
        Programs, and Policies. Elsevier Publishers. In press, 2021.

    Additional numerous editorials and op-ed articles in trade and 
technical publications

    The Chairman. Thank you, Dr. Spinrad. Now we will turn to 
Col. Melroy.

      STATEMENT OF COLONEL PAMELA A. MELROY (USAF, RET.),

              NOMINEE TO BE DEPUTY ADMINISTRATOR,

         NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION

    Colonel Melroy. Thank you, Chair Cantwell, Ranking Member 
Wicker, and members of the Committee. It is my honor to appear 
before you today as the President's nominee for Deputy 
Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration, supporting Senator Bill Nelson in his role as 
Administrator. First, I would like to thank my husband, Doug 
Hollett, for his unwavering support on this very special day, 
which happens to be our wedding anniversary.
    I would also like to thank my parents, Doug's son and his 
wife, and our extended family for their love and support, 
including my goddaughter, Katie, who is also here today. More 
than any other Government endeavor, NASA inspires and unites 
this Nation. With the tremendous bipartisan support of 
Congress, NASA's incredible workforce is ready to tackle our 
Nation's most pressing challenges, economic competitiveness, 
climate change, and maintaining American superiority and 
leadership in science and technology.
    I have worked in aerospace for my entire career and have 
experience in each of NASA's four mission areas. If confirmed, 
I am ready to help Administrator Nelson lead and manage NASA on 
day one. I served for 22 years as a pilot in the United States 
Air Force, including flying in Desert Shield, Desert Storm and 
as a test pilot. As a NASA astronaut, I spent 38 days in space, 
over three shuttle missions, serving as the mission commander 
in my final space flight in 2007.
    My experience in space gave me extensive knowledge of the 
complexity and the operations of the International Space 
Station and the rigors of human space flight. I had numerous 
special assignments, including as the Deputy Project Manager of 
the Columbia Crew Survival Investigation. I have an acute 
understanding of the difficult decisions NASA leadership faces 
in balancing bold exploration and safety.
    After leaving NASA, I worked in space industry before 
returning to public service at the FAA's Office of Commercial 
Space Transportation. This experience provided me a unique 
insight into the growing commercial space industry, which NASA 
increasingly partners with to execute missions such as the 
commercial resupply services and commercial crew. Following 
that experience, I worked at the Defense Advanced Research 
Projects Agency, or DARPA, as Deputy Director of the Tactical 
Technology Office, overseeing a large portfolio of 
developmental space and aeronautics technology projects.
    I saw firsthand how NASA, the DOD, and industry worked 
together to develop next generation technologies and bring them 
to market. If confirmed as Deputy Administrator, I would have 
the opportunity to utilize my understanding of these agencies 
to help foster synergies and maintain American leadership in 
science, space, and aeronautics. We are very fortunate to live 
in a country with an incredible diversity of thought and 
experience, and that is one of our greatest strengths. If 
confirmed as Deputy Administrator, I would support 
Administrator Nelson in fostering a culture of diversity, 
equity, and inclusion at NASA, and support the role of NASA in 
STEM education, growing our great Nation's next generation of 
scientists, engineers, and explorers.
    I also strongly support the Biden-Harris Administration's 
goal of addressing climate change. NASA's role in collecting 
data about the Earth's system is essential to this challenge. 
If confirmed as Deputy Administrator, I will work closely with 
NOAA and with other agencies to ensure a robust system of Earth 
data collection and dissemination. Finally, I am a firm 
believer in accountability for taxpayers dollars as if they 
were my own.
    My program management experience in industry and DARPA 
taught me that good financial and risk management is the 
linchpin of success. If confirmed, I look forward to bringing 
those experiences to NASA. I am incredibly passionate about 
NASA and its mission. If confirmed, I would be honored to 
support Administrator Nelson, execute the Administration's 
priorities, guide the next generation, and work with Congress 
on the future. Thanks for the opportunity to testify before you 
today. I look forward to answering any questions you may have.
    [The prepared statement and biographical information of 
Colonel Melroy follow:]

Prepared Statement of Colonel Pamela A. Melroy (USAF, Ret.), Nominee to 
 be Deputy Administrator, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
    Thank you Chair Cantwell, Ranking Member Wicker, and members of the 
committee. It is my honor to appear before you today as the President's 
nominee for Deputy Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration.
    When most Americans think of NASA, they think first of space 
exploration, and their own personal experiences watching an astronaut 
land on the Moon, a rocket launch, or, like we saw a few months ago, a 
rover touchdown on Mars. The recent first powered flight on another 
planet was followed closely by millions. More than any other government 
endeavor, NASA inspires and unites this Nation. And with the tremendous 
bipartisan support of the Congress, NASA and its incredible workforce 
is ready to tackle our Nation's most pressing challenges--economic 
competitiveness, climate change, and maintaining American leadership in 
science and technology.
    I have worked in aerospace for my entire career and have experience 
in each of NASA's four mission areas--aeronautics, space technology, 
human spaceflight, and science. I have a deep understanding of how the 
agency operates, and, if confirmed, I am ready to help Senator Nelson 
lead and manage NASA on day one.
    I served for 22 years as a pilot in the U.S. Air Force, including 
serving in Desert Shield/Desert Storm and as a test pilot. While in the 
Air Force I was selected as a NASA astronaut. I spent 38 days in space 
over three Space Shuttle missions, serving as the mission commander on 
my final spaceflight in 2007. My experience in space gave me extensive 
knowledge of the operations of the International Space Station and the 
rigors and complexity of human spaceflight. I also handled numerous 
special assignments including Deputy Project manager of the Columbia 
Crew Survival Investigation. These roles honed my leadership skills and 
fostered an acute understanding of the role NASA leadership plays, and 
the difficult decisions they face balancing bold exploration and 
safety.
    After leaving NASA, I worked in the space industry before returning 
to public service at the FAA's Office of Commercial Spaceflight. This 
experience provided me a unique insight into the growing commercial 
space industry, which NASA increasingly partners with to execute 
missions. Following that, I worked at the Defense Advanced Research 
Projects Agency (DARPA) as the Deputy Director of the Tactical 
Technology Office, which directs and oversees a large portfolio of 
space and aeronautics development projects.
    NASA does not operate in a vacuum, especially with the significant 
activities occurring in commercial space. If confirmed as Deputy, I 
would be committed to ensuring that NASA is coordinated with the other 
government agencies in advancing space policy. In my previous role at 
the FAA, I was responsible for oversight of commercial spaceflight 
licensed and permitted activities, including NASA's Commercial Resupply 
Services and Commercial Crew programs.
    This experience provided me with a unique insight and understanding 
of how NASA, the FAA, and the commercial space industry work together.
    In a similar vein, my experience at DARPA exposed me to how NASA, 
the DoD, and industry work together to develop next generation 
technologies. If confirmed as Deputy Administrator, I would have the 
opportunity to utilize my understanding of these agencies to help 
foster synergies and maintain American leadership in space and 
aeronautics.
    For America to continue to lead the world in space, it must do so 
in a way that inspires and benefits all Americans. If confirmed as 
Deputy Administrator, I would be committed to ensuring that there are 
fair and inclusive processes within the agency and in our partnerships. 
We are privileged to live in a country with an incredible diversity of 
thought and experience, and that is one of our greatest strengths. 
Senator Nelson and I are both deeply committed to fostering a culture 
of diversity, equity, and inclusion at NASA. We also support the role 
of NASA in STEM education, supporting our great nation's next 
generation of scientists, engineers, and explorers.
    NASA is unique because its programs are awe-inspiring and have the 
potential to fundamentally change humanity's understanding of the 
universe. NASA's role is collecting data about the Earth system and 
understanding the effects of climate change will be essential to those 
tasked with determining policy. If confirmed as Deputy Administrator, I 
will work closely with NOAA and ensure a robust program of Earth data 
collection and dissemination.
    However, it is still essential to have the right insight and 
oversight of these programs. I am a firm believer in accountability for 
taxpayers' dollars as if they were my own. Executing NASA's missions in 
a cost-effective way helps America achieve the most aspirational goals 
in a safe and fiscally responsible way. My program management 
experience in industry and at DARPA, where I was responsible for more 
than $500 million per year in advanced projects spanning space, air, 
ground, and maritime domains, will be highly relevant. Good financial 
and risk management is the linchpin of success. If confirmed, I look 
forward to bringing these experiences to NASA.
    I am incredibly passionate about NASA and its mission. If 
confirmed, I would be honored to support the Administrator, execute on 
the administration's priorities, guiding the next generation, and 
working with Congress on the future.
    Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today. I look 
forward to answering any questions that you may have.
                                 ______
                                 
                      a. biographical information
    1. Name (Include any former names or nicknames used): Pamela Ann 
Melroy
    2. Position to which nominated: Deputy Administrator, NASA
    3. Date of Nomination: April 22, 2021
    4. Address (List current place of residence and office addresses):

        Residence: Information not released to the public.
        Office: Information not provided.

    5. Date and Place of Birth: 9/17/61; Palo Alto, CA
    6. Provide the name, position, and place of employment for your 
spouse (if married) and the names and ages of your children (including 
stepchildren and children by a previous marriage).

        Douglas W. Hollett, President, Melroy & Hollett Technology 
        Partners

        Senior Advisor for Energy, Nova Systems Pty (casual employment)

        Ryan W. Hollett, stepson, 38

    7. List all college and graduate degrees. Provide year and school 
attended.

        Wellesley College BA, Physics and Astronomy, 1983
        MIT SM Earth and Planetary Science, 1984

    8. List all post-undergraduate employment, and highlight all 
management level jobs held and any non-managerial jobs that relate to 
the position for which you are nominated.

        Massachusetts Institute of Technology 1983-84
        Teaching assistant and research assistant, Earth and Planetary 
        Science

        United States Air Force: 1984-2007
        Student pilot, KC-10 pilot
        KC-10 aircraft commander (management)
        KC-10 instructor pilot (management)
        Student test pilot
        Experimental test pilot (management, relevant to NASA 
        aeronautics)
        NASA pilot astronaut (management, relevant to NASA spaceflight)

        NASA: 2007-2009
        NASA pilot astronaut and Space Shuttle Commander (management, 
        relevant to human space flight)
        Deputy Project Manager, Columbia Crew Survival Investigation 
        (management, relevant to space safety)
        Branch Chief, Exploration (management, relevant to development 
        of new spacecraft)

        Lockheed Martin: 2009-2011
        Director/Deputy Program Manager, Space Exploration Initiatives 
        (management, development of new spacecraft Orion)

        FAA: 2011-2013
        Acting Deputy Associate Administrator (management, relevant to 
        commercial spaceflight licensing and space policy)
        Director of Field Operations (management, relevant to 
        commercial Spaceflight licensing and safety)
        Senior Technical Advisor (commercial spaceflight safety)

        Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA): 2013-2017
        Deputy Director, Tactical Technology Office (management, 
        oversight of aeronautics and space research portfolio)

        Melroy & Hollett Technology Partners: 2017 to present
        CEO--consultant on space technology and policy (clients below)

        Nova Systems Pty Australia: 2018 to present (full time in 2018, 
        now casual status)
        Director, Space Technology and Policy (consultant on space 
        technology and policy, advised during formation of Australian 
        Space Agency)

    9. Attach a copy of your resume. (attached)
    10. List any advisory, consultative, honorary, or other part-time 
service or positions with Federal, State, or local governments, other 
than those listed above, within the last ten years.

        National Space Council User's Advisory Group--chair, Technology 
        and Innovation Subcommittee (2018 to present)

    11. List all positions held as an officer, director, trustee, 
partner, proprietor, agent, representative, or consultant of any 
corporation, company, firm, partnership, or other business, enterprise, 
educational, or other institution within the last ten years.

        Melroy & Hollett Technology Partners CEO, (2017 to present)

        Nova Systems Pty, Director of Space Technology and Policy 
        (executive consultant), (2018 to present, currently on casual 
        status)

        Corporation boards and advisory groups:

        Anthrotronix Corporation Board Director (2017 to present)

        Myriota Pty Ltd Board Director (2019 to present)

        Systems Planning and Analysis Board Director (2019 to present)

        Lockheed Martin Technology Advisory Group (2018-2020)

        BridgeComm Advisory Board Member (2019 to present)

        Gilmour Space Technology, Advisory Board Member (2018-2020)

        Flawless Photonics Advisory Board Member (2021 to present)

        Not-for profit boards and advisory groups:
        Aerospace Corporation Board Director (2019 to present)

        Australian Remote Operations for Space and Earth (AROSE)

        Consortium Board Director (2020 to present)

        National Academies Aeronautics and Space Engineering Board, 
        Member and Chair, 2019 to present

        National Academies Space Technology Industry Government 
        University Roundtable, 2017-2019

        Planetary Science Institute Board Director (2017-2019) 
        Wellesley College Trustee (2005-2017)

        National Museum of the Air Force Foundation Trustee (2011-2014)

        Association of Space Explorers Board member (201O-2013)

        American Chamber of Commerce in Australia, South Australian 
        Board and member of Space Committee (2020 to present)

        Consultant Clients:
        Aerospace Corporation, Center for Space Policy and Strategy 
        (2017-2019)

        Systems Planning and Analysis (2017 to present)

        Bryce Aerospace (2019 to present)

        Johns Hopkins University, Applied Physics Laboratory (2017 to 
        present)

        Institute for Defense Analysis Science and Technology Policy 
        Institute (2020 to present)

        Google (2019-2020)

        Alphasights (2020)

        Draper Laboratory (2020)

        Other:
        International Astronautical Federation mentorship program, 
        executive mentor

        Brooke Owens Fellowship, mentor

        Matt Isakowitz Fellowship, mentor

    12. Please list each membership you have had during the past ten 
years or currently hold with any civic, social, charitable, 
educational, political, professional, fraternal, benevolent or 
religiously affiliated organization, private club, or other membership 
organization. (For this question, you do not have to list your 
religious affiliation or membership in a religious house of worship or 
institution.). Include dates of membership and any positions you have 
held with any organization. Please note whether any such club or 
organization restricts membership on the basis of sex, race, color, 
religion, national origin, age, or disability.

        The Ninety Nines--member--(1986 to present)

        Society of Experimental Test Pilots--Associate Fellow (1996 to 
        present)

        Association of Space Explorers (Member 2009 to present; Board 
        director 2010-2013)

        Women In Aerospace--member 2011 to present

        American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Associate 
        Fellow (2013 to present). Multiple committee memberships.

        International Women's Forum, member--2018 to present

        University Club of DC--member, 2011 to present

    13. Have you ever been a candidate for and/or held a public office 
(elected, non-elected, or appointed)? If so, indicate whether any 
campaign has any outstanding debt, the amount, and whether you are 
personally liable for that debt. No.
    14. List all memberships and offices held with and services 
rendered to, whether compensated or not, any political party or 
election committee within the past ten years. If you have held a paid 
position or served in a formal or official advisory position (whether 
compensated or not) in a political campaign within the past ten years, 
identify the particulars of the campaign, including the candidate, year 
of the campaign, and your title and responsibilities. None.
    15. Itemize all political contributions to any individual, campaign 
organization, political party, political action committee, or similar 
entity of $500 or more for the past ten years.

        4/7/2010--$500 for Gabby Giffords for Congress

    16. List all scholarships, fellowships, honorary degrees, honorary 
society memberships, military medals, and any other special recognition 
for outstanding service or achievements.

        AFROTC Scholarship for undergraduate

        Member, Sigma Xi

        Honorary PhD--Nazareth College

        Honorary PhD--Iona College

        Honorary PhD--Dominican University

        AIAA Public Service Award

        Flight Achievement Award, American Astronautical Society

        Wellesley College Alumnae Achievement Award

        NASA Distinguished Service Medal

        NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal

        NASA Spaceflight Medal

        Secretary of Defense Medal for Outstanding Public Service

        Defense Superior Service Medal 1OLC

        Air Force Meritorious Service Medal 1OLC

        Air Force Air Medal 1OLC

        Air Force Aerial Achievement Medal 1OLC

        National Defense Service Medal with Bronze Star

    17. Please list each book, article, column, Internet blog posting, 
or other publication you have authored, individually or with others. 
Include a link to each publication when possible. Also list any 
speeches that you have given on topics relevant to the position for 
which you have been nominated. Do not attach copies of these 
publications unless otherwise instructed.
Publications:
        Pamela Melroy, Roger Hall. In: Sachdev, D.K, editor. Recent 
        Successful Satellite Systems: Visions of the Future, Library of 
        Flight, pp. 189-198. https://doi.org/l0.2514/
        5.9781624104053.0189.0198 Copyright AIAA 2017.

        Brian Mayeaux, John Olivas, Pamela Melroy, Darren Cone, and 
        William Rochelle, ``Material Behavior of Titanium in Space 
        Entry Environments,'' 3rd AIAA Atmospheric Space Environments 
        Conference. June 2011.

        Brian Mayeaux, John Olivas, Pamela Melroy, and Darren Cone, 
        ``Study of Ti Alloy Combustion Susceptibility in Simulated 
        Entry Environments,'' AIAA SPACE 2009 Conference & Exposition. 
        September 2009.

        Columbia Crew Survival Investigation Report, co-author. NASA/
        SP-2008-565. 2008.

        Richard G. French, Pamela A. Melroy, Richard L. Baron, Edward 
        W. Dunham, Karen J. Meech, and Douglas J. Mink. The 1983 June 
        15 Occultation by Neptune. II. The Oblateness of Neptune. The 
        Astronomical Journal, Volume 90, Number 12, December 1985. 
        https://www.researchgate.net/publication/258943
        935_The_l983_June_15_occultation_by_Neptune_II_-
        _The_oblateness_of_Neptune

        RV. Stachnik; P Melroy; E F. McCormack; D Arnold and DY. 
        Gezari. Multiple Spacecraft Michelson Stellar Interferometer, 
        Proc. SPIE 0445, Instiumentation in Astronomy V, 358 (January 
        9, 1984); doi:10.1117/12.966167; http://dx.doi
        .org/10.l117/12.966167
Speeches:
        There are many public speeches I have given relative to 
        spaceflight and my experiences as an executive and as an 
        astronaut. The following is a list of speeches given in the 
        last year:

        Women in Aerospace International Women's Day Panel--8 March 21

        Woodside Energy International Women's Day--1 March 21

        AJAA Sci Tech Emerging technologies Plenary--15 Jan 21

        KID Museum Fundraising Event--3 Dec 20

        Space Cafe Podcast--Nov 20

        The Virtual Astronaut Series--23 Oct 20

        The Australasian Institute of Mining and Metallurgy Thought 
        Leadership Series--15 Sep 20

        Coalition for Deep Space Exploration Deep Space Podcast--29 Sep 
        20

        G'Day USA US--Australia Space Industry Exchange--24 Sep 20

        AIAA Ascendx Summit--Space Force and Space Command: Myths, 
        Opportunities and Tech--19 August 20

        CSIRO Space Tech Symposium--9 Sep 20

        EmTech Asia--4 Aug 20

        AeroSpace Village at DEFCON--9 Aug 20

        Aviation Week Webinar on Return of U.S. Human Orbital Flight--
        12 May 20

        RMIT Global Leadership Forum--5 May 20

        Congressional Space Studies Series Lecture--24 April 20

        Symposium on Trust in SSA with Aerospace and GW School Of 
        Policy--9 March 20

        American Chamber of Commerce in Australia, South Australia--3 
        Mar 20

        CSIS Smart Women, Smart Power Event--14 Jan 20

    18. List digital platforms (including social media and other 
digital content sites) on which you currently or have formerly operated 
an account, regardless of whether or not the account was held in your 
name or an alias. Include the name of an ``alias'' or ``handle'' you 
have used on each of the named platforms. Indicate whether the account 
is active, deleted, or dormant. Include a link to each account if 
possible.

        https://www.facebook.com/pamela.melroy

        https://www.linkedin.com/in/pamela-melroy-46a34121/

        https://www.instagram.com/pammelroy/

        https://twitter.com/Astro_Pam

        All accounts active

    19. Please identify each instance in which you have testified 
orally or in writing before Congress in a governmental or non-
governmental capacity and specify the date and subject matter of each 
testimony.

        Testimony to Senate Commerce, Aviation and Space Subcommittee 
        May 14, 2019 on ''The Emerging Space Environment: Operational, 
        Technical, and Policy Challenges'': https://
        www.commerce.senate.gov/services/files/2DFA5DA7-09D9
        -4DCB-A4FD-68AD5l0F668C

        Testimony to Senate Space, Science and Competitiveness 
        Subcommittee May 23, 2017 ``Exploring How the Outer Space 
        Treaty will Impact American Commerce and Settlement in Space'': 
        https://www.commerce.senate.gov/public/
        _cache/files/32e3l3ff-7f40-4090-8769-aa1cdb9709cc/
        CDDF232F507496D22B29
        BCC26D58A000.col-pamela-melroy-testimony.pdf

        Testified to same Senate Space, Science and Competitiveness 
        Subcommittee in June 20, 2012 in a government capacity when at 
        the FAA Office of Commercial Space Transportation: http://
        www.hq.nasa.gov/legislative/hearings/2012%20
        hearings/6-20-2012%20MELROY.pdf

    20. Given the current mission, major programs, and major 
operational objectives of the department/agency to which you have been 
nominated, what in your background or employment experience do you 
believe affirmatively qualifies you for appointment to the position for 
which you have been nominated, and why do you wish to serve in that 
position?
    I have over 35 years of leadership and supervisory experience, in 
the military, government, and industry. I have background and 
experience in each of the four mission areas of NASA-aeronautics, space 
technology, human spaceflight, and science, and deep understanding of 
how the agency operates. As a former astronaut I have extensive 
knowledge of the operations of the ISS, requirements for new space 
vehicles, and safety considerations. My program management experience 
includes large and small programs in industry and government, 
particularly in development. I have experience from DARPA setting 
technology and programmatic strategy from overseeing a large 
aeronautics and space research portfolio.
    NASA does not operate in a vacuum, especially with the significant 
activities occurring in commercial space. I have space policy and 
regulatory experience from the FAA's Office of Commercial Space 
Transportation, and understand how NASA and the FAA work together on 
programs like Commercial Cargo and Commercial crew. My experience at 
DARPA also exposed me to how NASA and the DoD work together both in the 
field at launch sites and with technology development.
    I believe this is a thrilling time with many exciting programs 
happening at NASA. Importantly, the Artemis, Moon-to-Mars, and James 
Webb Telescope programs are absolutely critical to maintaining NASA's 
leadership in human space flight and exploration. I believe that it is 
essential to have the right oversight of these programs for the most 
effective performance in safety, cost, and schedule. I am passionate 
about the agency and its mission, and I wish to serve as Deputy 
Administrator, supporting the Administrator, providing oversight, and 
guiding the next generation of the wonderful NASA employees that are so 
dear to me.
    21. What do you believe are your responsibilities, if confirmed, to 
ensure that the department/agency has proper management and accounting 
controls, and what experience do you have in managing a large 
organization?
    As Deputy Administrator, it will be my responsibility to work 
closely with the CFO, Chief of Staff, Center Directors and the 
Associate Administrator to ensure rigorous standards of personnel and 
financial management are upheld throughout the agency. I have been a 
supervisor for over 35 years and have run organizations of more than 
350 people and oversight of more than $550M a year in budget.
    22. What do you believe to be the top three challenges facing the 
department/agency, and why?
    Defining the cost and schedule for Moon-to-Mars. The challenge is 
to identify and stay focused on those requirements that ensure safety 
and mission success, particularly what must be accomplished on the Moon 
prior to going to Mars.
    Program management. Increasingly NASA is engaging with non 
traditional industry (such as start ups) when goals are aligned. 
However, incentivizing industry is no longer only about traditional 
cost plus incentive fee contracts. There are many contractual 
approaches that scale oversight and incentivize performance, and NASA 
must effectively take advantage of these methods.
    Looking ahead to the end of the International Space Station, where 
will NASA perform microgravity science? Is commercial industry ready to 
take on a private space station, and how can NASA help?
                   b. potential conflicts of interest
    1. Describe all financial arrangements, deferred compensation 
agreements, and other continuing dealings with business associates, 
clients, or customers. Please include information related to retirement 
accounts.
    My arrangements, agreements, and other dealings are described in my 
Public Financial Disclosure report which the U.S. Office of Government 
Ethics will provide to the Committee.
    2. Do you have any commitments or agreements, formal or informal, 
to maintain employment, affiliation, or practice with any business, 
association or other organization during your appointment? If so, 
please explain. No.
    3. Indicate any investments, obligations, liabilities, or other 
relationships which could involve potential conflicts of interest in 
the position to which you have been nominated. Explain how you will 
resolve each potential conflict of interest.
    In connection with the nomination process, I have consulted with 
NASA ethics officials and the Office of Government Ethics to identify 
any potential conflict of interest. Any potential conflict of interest 
will be resolved according to the terms of the ethics agreement that I 
have entered into with NASA's Designated Agency Ethics Official, and I 
understand will be provided to this Committee. I am not aware of any 
potential conflict of interest other than those identified in my ethics 
agreement. In the event that an actual or potential conflict of 
interest arises during my appointment, I will consult with NASA's 
ethics officials and take the actions necessary to resolve the 
conflict.
    4. Describe any business relationship, dealing, or financial 
transaction which you have had during the last ten years, whether for 
yourself, on behalf of a client, or acting as an agent, that could in 
any way constitute or result in a possible conflict of interest in the 
position to which you have been nominated. Explain how you will resolve 
each potential conflict of interest.
    Any potential conflicts of interest have been identified in my 
ethics agreement, which will be provided to the Committee, and will be 
resolved in accordance with the te1ms of that ethics agreement.
    5. Identify any other potential conflicts of interest, and explain 
how you will resolve each potential conflict of interest.
    I am not aware of any other potential conflicts of interest that 
may arise other than those identified in my ethics agreement. However, 
should a conflict arise during my appointment, I will consult with 
NASA's ethics officials and take the actions necessary to resolve the 
conflict.
    6. Describe any activity during the past ten years, including the 
names of clients represented, in which you have been engaged for the 
purpose of directly or indirectly influencing the passage, defeat, or 
modification of any legislation or affecting the administration and 
execution of law or public policy. None.
                            c. legal matters
    1. Have you ever been disciplined or cited for a breach of ethics, 
professional misconduct, or retaliation by, or been the subject of a 
complaint to, any court, administrative agency, the Office of Special 
Counsel, professional association, disciplinary committee, or other 
professional group? If yes:

  a.  Provide the name of agency, association, committee, or group;

  b.   Provide the date the citation, disciplinary action, complaint, 
        or personnel action was issued or initiated;

  c.  Describe the citation, disciplinary action, complaint, or 
        personnel action;

  d.  Provide the results of the citation, disciplinary action, 
        complaint, or personnel action.
    No.
    2. Have you ever been investigated, arrested, charged, or held by 
any Federal, State, or other law enforcement authority of any Federal, 
State, county, or municipal entity, other than for a minor traffic 
offense? If so, please explain. No.
    3. Have you or any business or nonprofit of which you are or were 
an officer ever been involved as a party in an administrative agency 
proceeding, criminal proceeding, or civil litigation? If so, please 
explain. No.
    4. Have you ever been convicted (including pleas of guilty or nolo 
contendere) of any criminal violation other than a minor traffic 
offense? If so, please explain. No.
    5. Have you ever been accused, formally or informally, of sexual 
harassment or discrimination on the basis of sex, race, religion, or 
any other basis? If so, please explain. No.
    6. Please advise the Committee of any additional information, 
favorable or unfavorable, which you feel should be disclosed in 
connection with your nomination. None.
                     d. relationship with committee
    1. Will you ensure that your department/agency complies with 
deadlines for information set by congressional committees, and that 
your department/agency endeavors to timely comply with requests for 
information from individual Members of Congress, including requests 
from members in the minority?
    Yes, I look forward to working with Congressional members and 
committee staff.
    2. Will you ensure that your department/agency does whatever it can 
to protect congressional witnesses and whistle blowers from reprisal 
for their testimony and disclosures? Yes.
    3. Will you cooperate in providing the Committee with requested 
witnesses, including technical experts and career employees, with 
firsthand knowledge of matters of interest to the Committee? Yes.
    4. Are you willing to appear and testify before any duly 
constituted committee of the Congress on such occasions as you may be 
reasonably requested to do so? Yes.
                                 ______
                                 
                       Resume of Pamela A. Melroy
                        Professional Experience
Feb 2017 to present, owner and CEO, Melroy & Hollett Technology 
Partners
   Consultant on air and space technology and policy

Feb 2018 to present, Director of Space Technology and Policy, Nova 
Systems Pty Australia
   Consultant on space technology and policy in emerging 
        Australian civil, security, and commercial space sector

   Stood up a consortium of resources and aerospace companies 
        to promote the cross-flow of technology from space to mining/
        oil and gas remote asset management capabilities

Jan 2013-Feb 2017
Deputy Director, Tactical Technology Office, Defense Advanced Research 
Projects Agency (DARPA)
   Responsible for daily operations of >$500M/year high-risk, 
        high-payoff disruptive advanced research and development 
        projects spanning space, air, ground, and maritime domains 
        including X-planes and space platforms

   High-profile unclassified technology transitions include 
        Space Surveillance Telescope, Long-Range Anti-Ship Missile, and 
        Anti-Submarine warfare Continuous Track Unmanned Vessel (ACTUV 
        Sea-Hunter)

   Part of core senior leadership team directing DARPA's 
        technology investment strategy and building inter-governmental 
        partnerships particularly in national security space programs

April 2011-January 2013
Acting Deputy Associate Administrator, Director of Field Operations and 
Senior Technical Advisor
        FAA Office of Commercial Space Transportation
   As acting Deputy Associate Administrator, responsible for 
        oversight of commercial spaceflight licensed and permitted 
        activities to include NASA's Commercial Resupply Se1vices and 
        Commercial Crew programs

   Helped develop the National Space Transportation Policy as 
        representative of Department of Transportation

   Led development of first-ever guidelines for commercial 
        human spaceflight safety

August 2009-Feb 2011
Director/Deputy Program Manager, Space Exploration Initiatives, Crew 
Exploration Vehicle Lockheed Martin
   Oversight of $400+M contract and 320+ engineers designing 
        Orion, NASA's lunar-capable human spacecraft

   Responsible for finance, contracting, human resources, 
        earned value and risk management--rapid, successful transition 
        to corporate environment demonstrated flexibility and 
        leadership skills

March 1995-August 2009
Astronaut, Johnson Space Center, National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration
Flew three Space Shuttle missions as Pilot and Commander. Concurrent 
duties/special assignments between flights.

Commander, SATS-120
   Commander of mission to the International Space Station 
        (ISS)--one of two women to command the Space Shuttle

   Leadership responsibility for 200+ people in schedule, 
        training and performance

   Led STS-120 team to successful mission, including emergency 
        spacewalk to repair torn solar array which threatened the ISS

Pilot, STS-112
   Pilot and second-in-command on highly successful multi-
        national assembly mission to the ISS

   As spacewalk coordinator, directed and managed activities 
        for three challenging spacewalks

Pilot, STS-92
   Pilot and second-in-command on highly successful multi-
        national assembly mission to the ISS

   First-ever operator of the primary mechanism to attach new 
        elements to the Space Station

   Early promotion to the rank of Lt Colonel

Special Assignments

Branch Chief, Astronaut Office, liaison to Orion Crew Exploration 
Vehicle Program
   Principle representative of Flight Crew Operations 
        Directorate to all program-level control boards

Deputv Project Manager, Columbia Crew Survival Investigation
   Ground-breaking investigation uncovered major implications 
        for future spaceflight, public and private

   Co-author of the only public report on crew survival in a 
        space mishap

Lead, Columbia Crew Module Reconstruction
   Responsible for all activities related to reconstruction of 
        the Columbia Crew Module after mishap

Lead, Astronaut Public and Media Appearances
   Supervised activities of 13 personnel supporting over 2000 
        astronaut appearances requests annually

United States Air Force pilot, test pilot
C-17 Test Pilot, Student Test Pilot, Edwards AFB, CA,
   Developmental test pilot for C-17; specialty in air 
        refueling, structures, and all-weather testing

   Early promotion to rank of Major

   Set 10 world aviation records; developed and flew first-ever 
        C-17 air show demonstration

KC-10 Pilot, Aircraft Commander/Instructor Pilot, Barksdale AFB LA
   Logged over 2300 hours as a pilot, aircraft commander, and 
        instructor pilot in the KC-10

   Flew over 200 combat and combat support hours during DESERT 
        SHIELD/DESERT STORM and JUST CAUSE

   Senior instructor for KC-10 Combat Crew Training--training 
        all new pilots
                               Education
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, MS in Earth & Planetary Sciences
Wellesley College, cum laude, BA in Physics and Astronomy
                       Professional Affiliations
Associate Fellow, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Associate Fellow, Society of Experimental Test Pilots
Member, National Academy of Engineering Member, Association of Space 
Explorers
                          Other Public Service
National Space Council User Advisory Group-chair, Technology and 
Innovation Subcommittee
Australian Space Agency Advisory Group--member
National Academies of Science, Engineering and Medicine-Aeronautics and 
Space Engineering Board, vice-chair
National Academies of Science, Engineering and Medicine-member, Space 
Technology Industry Government and University (STIGUR) Roundtable 
(2017-2019)
                           Honors and Awards
NASA Distinguished Service Medal--highest award given
NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal
Secretary of Defense Medal for Outstanding Public Service
AIAA Public Service Award
Flight Achievement Award, American Astronautical Society
Wellesley College Alumnae Achievement Award
USAF Air Medal, 1st Oak Leaf Cluster
                             Board Service
Aerospace Corporation--Board of Directors
Anthrotronix Corporation--Board of Directors
Myriota Pty Ltd--Board of Directors
Systems Planning and Analysis--Board of Directors
Australian Remote Operations for Space and Earth (AROSE) consortium--
Board of Directors
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Visiting Committee, Aeronautics 
and Astronautics
Wellesley College Board of Trustees, 2005-2017
Air Force Museum Foundation Board of Managers, Dayton OH--2010-2014
Manned Spaceflight Education Foundation Board of Directors, Houston TX 
2010-2011
Association of Space Explorers, USA Board of Directors 2011-2015

    The Chairwoman. Thank you, Col. Melroy. And again, 
congratulations to you and your husband Douglas. Makes for a 
very unique anniversary, I am sure. So, again, thank you. Thank 
you to him for helping support you today. That is very--that is 
great. So last but certainly not least is the honorable Carlos 
Monje. Am I saying that correctly?
    Mr. Monje. Yes, ma'am. Carlos Monje.
    The Chairwoman. Monje, thank you so much. Thank you so much 
for being here today. And thank you for your past service.

    STATEMENT OF CARLOS A. MONJE, JR., NOMINEE TO BE UNDER 
  SECRETARY OF TRANSPORTATION FOR POLICY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF 
                         TRANSPORTATION

    Mr. Monje. Thank you. Chair Cantwell, Ranking Member 
Wicker, members of the Committee, I am humbled to appear before 
you today as President Biden's nominee to be Undersecretary of 
Transportation Policy at the Department of Transportation. I 
would like to thank my wife, Anne, who is here today and is a 
brilliant public servant and a wonderful mother to our boys, 
Sebastian and Leo. I would like to thank my big sister, both my 
big sisters, and my in-laws who are watching from home, 
President Biden and Secretary Buttigieg for their faith in me, 
and the more than 50,000 professionals who work at the 
Department of Transportation for welcoming me back 120 days 
ago.
    These are men and women who take pride in their mission, 
utilize their expertise every day to improve the lives of 
people across the country. It would be the honor of my career 
to help lead that work. At the end of the Obama Administration, 
I was Assistant Secretary for Policy and Acting Undersecretary. 
I worked on improving our freight networks, helping communities 
thrive, setting up the Build America Bureau, and advocated for 
the passage of the FAST Act.
    I previously was Special Assistant to the President and 
Chief of Staff at the White House Domestic Policy Council. I 
worked here in the Senate on political campaigns, large and 
small, and in the private sector. I have worked for three 
Presidential transitions, including the last one, where I built 
a team of more than 400 volunteers to do a top to bottom review 
of all the domestic agencies of the Federal Government. We 
accomplished our goals and prepared the new Administration to 
take on the overlapping crises facing us. As we come out of the 
darkness of COVID, our transportation network, like the Nation 
itself, is stepping into a bright but unfamiliar future.
    Millions of Americans are back on the job, yet many are 
forgoing their daily commute and working from home. People are 
beginning to confidently travel again on busses, trains and 
airplanes, but transit agencies and airlines still have a long 
way to recover. A supply chain that was stretched to its 
breaking point as Americans stayed home and bought things 
online is still digging out with containers piled up at 
airports. And even as drivers were on the road less last year, 
crashes and road fatalities spiked for the first time in 
decades.
    The U.S. Department of Transportation is in a unique 
position to lead, and we need to. That means deploying the 
intellectual firepower of our research and technology assets to 
help state, local, and tribal partners anticipate and plan for 
the new normal. It means making our port, rail, and intermodal 
facilities more robust and resilient so that American farmers 
and manufacturers can ship their goods across the country and 
around the globe. Leading means helping communities make the 
most of their limited dollars through impactful grant and 
innovative finance programs. And it means rededicating 
ourselves to safety so that every trip on every mode of 
transportation ends with a safe arrival.
    Earlier this year, the President released the American Jobs 
Plan. At a time when we face a trillion dollar backlog of 
needed repairs and improvements, the American Jobs Plan would 
modernize our transportation system, improving more than 20,000 
miles of roads and 10,000 bridges. It would expand world class 
passenger rail services, invest in ports, waterways and 
aviation, and double Federal spending for public transit. The 
American Jobs Plan would reconnect urban and rural communities 
left behind by past decisions and give millions more commuters 
safer, shorter, cleaner, and more affordable options whether 
they move by car, public transit, foot, bike or wheelchair.
    It would combat the climate crisis and create good union 
jobs by sparking an electric vehicle revolution and by building 
a national network of a half million electric vehicle chargers. 
If I have the honor of being confirmed by you, I vow to work 
with this committee to strengthen the Department and achieve 
better results for the American people. I know you and your 
staff have deep expertise on our shared infrastructure 
challenges and that your knowledge of the needs of your 
constituents is unrivaled, and that your role as a partner in 
governing is vital to our shared success.
    In closing, thank you again for your consideration and the 
opportunity to appear before you. I look forward to your 
questions.
    [The prepared statement and biographical information of Mr. 
Monje follow:]

       Prepared Statement of Carlos A. Monje, Jr., Nominee to be 
    Undersecretary of Transportation for Policy, U.S. Department of 
                             Transportation
    Chair Cantwell, Ranking Member Wicker, Members of the Committee, I 
am humbled to appear before you today as President Biden's nominee to 
be the Under Secretary of Transportation for Policy at the U.S. 
Department of Transportation.
    I'd like to thank my wife Anne, who is here today and is a 
brilliant public servant and wonderful mother to our boys Sebastian and 
Leonel. I'd like to thank my big sisters who are watching from home, 
President Biden and Secretary Buttigieg for their faith in me, and the 
more than 50,000 professionals who work at the Department of 
Transportation for welcoming me back 120 days ago.
    These are men and women who take pride in their mission and utilize 
their expertise every day to improve the lives of people across the 
country. It would be the honor of my career to help lead that mission.
    At the end of the Obama Administration, I served as Assistant 
Secretary for Policy and Acting Under Secretary. I worked on improving 
our freight networks, helping communities thrive, standing up the Build 
America Bureau and advocating for the passage of the FAST Act. I 
previously was Special Assistant to the President and Chief of Staff of 
the White House Domestic Policy Council.
    I've worked here in the Senate, on political campaigns large and 
small, and in the private sector. I've worked for three presidential 
transitions, including the last one, where I built a team of more than 
400 volunteers to do a top-to-bottom review of all the domestic 
agencies of the Federal government. We accomplished our goals and 
prepared the new Administration to take on the overlapping crises 
facing us.
    As we come out of the darkness of COVID, our transportation 
network--like the Nation itself--is stepping into a bright, but 
unfamiliar future. Millions of Americans are back on the job, yet many 
are forgoing their daily commute and working from home. People are 
beginning to confidently travel again on buses, trains and airplanes, 
but transit agencies and airlines still have a long way to recover. A 
supply chain that was stretched to its breaking point as Americans 
stayed home and bought things online, is still digging out, with 
containers piled up at our ports. And even as drivers were on the road 
less last year, crashes and road fatalities spiked for the first time 
in decades.
    The U.S. Department of Transportation is in a unique position to 
lead, and we need to. That means deploying the intellectual firepower 
of our research and technology assets to help state, local and Tribal 
partners anticipate and plan for the new normal. It means making our 
port, rail and intermodal facilities more robust and resilient so that 
American farmers and manufacturers can ship their goods across the 
country and around the globe. Leading means helping communities make 
the most of their limited dollars through impactful grant and 
innovative finance programs. And it means rededicating ourselves to 
safety, so that every trip on every mode of transportation ends with a 
safe arrival.
    Earlier this year, the President released the American Jobs Plan. 
At a time when we face a trillion-dollar backlog of needed repairs and 
improvements, the American Jobs Plan would modernize our transportation 
system, improving more than 20,000 miles of roads and 10,000 bridges. 
It would expand world-class passenger rail services, invest in ports, 
waterways and aviation, and double Federal spending for public transit.
    The American Jobs Plan would reconnect urban and rural communities 
left behind by past decisions, and give millions more commuters safer, 
shorter, cleaner and more affordable options, whether they move by car, 
public transit, foot, bike, or wheelchair. It would combat the climate 
crisis and create good union jobs by sparking an electric vehicle 
revolution, and by building a national network of 500,000 electric 
vehicle chargers.
    If I have the honor of being confirmed by you, I vow to work with 
this committee to strengthen the Department and achieve better results 
for the American people. I know you and your staff have deep expertise 
on our shared infrastructure challenges, that your knowledge of the 
needs of your constituents is unrivaled, and that your role as a 
partner in governing is vital to our shared success.
    In closing, thank you again for your consideration and the 
opportunity to appear before you. I look forward to your questions.
                                 ______
                                 
                      a. biographical information
    1. Name (Include any former names or nicknames used): Carlos 
Alberto Monje Jr.
    2. Position to which nominated: Under Secretary of Transportation 
for Policy, Department of Transportation
    3. Date of Nomination: April 27, 2021
    4. Address (List current place of residence and office addresses):

        Residence: Information not released to the public.
        Office: 1200 New Jersey Ave. NW Washington, DC 20590.
    5. Date and Place of Birth: July 17, 1978; New Orleans, LA
    6. Provide the name, position, and place of employment for your 
spouse (if married) and the names and ages of your children (including 
stepchildren and children by a previous marriage).

        Anne Filipic, Assistant to the President and Head of Management 
        and Administration, The White House

    7. List all college and graduate degrees. Provide year and school 
attended.

        Harvard University, Bachelor of Arts, 2000

    8. List all post-undergraduate employment, and highlight all 
management-level jobs held and any non-managerial jobs that relate to 
the position for which you are nominated.

        Department of Transportation
        Senior Advisor
        Washington, DC
        January 2021 to present

        PT Fund. Inc (Biden-Harris Transition)
        Deputy of Agency Review (Domestic and Economic)
        Washington, DC
        September 2020-January 2021

        Twitter, Inc.
        Director of Policy & Philanthropy, U.S. & Canada
        Washington, DC
        March 2017-September 2020

        Beeck Center--Georgetown University
        Fellow
        Washington DC
        February 2016-May 2016

    Clinton-Kaine Transition
        Director of Agency Review
        Washington, DC
        September 2016-November 2016

        U.S. Department of Transportation
        Acting Under Secretary of Transportation for Policy, January 
        2016-July 2016
        Assistant Secretary for Transportation Policy, March 2015-
        September 2016
        Counselor to the Secretary, February 2014-March 2015
        Washington, DC

        White House Domestic Policy Council
        Special Assistant to the President
        And Chief of Staff of the DPC
        Washington, DC
        January 2011-January 2014

        White House Domestic Policy Council
        Senior Policy Advisor
        Washington, DC
        February 2009-January 2011

        Presidential Transition Project
        National Security Policy Working Group
        Washington, DC
        November 2008-January 2009

        Obama for America
        Deputy Policy Director
        Chicago, IL
        March 2007-November 2008

        U.S. Senator Barack Obama (D-IL)
        Special Assistant for Policy and Communications
        Washington, DC
        January 2005-February 2007

        U.S. Senator Ken Salazar (D-CO)
        Legislative Assistant
        Washington, DC
        January 2005-December 2005

        Erskine Bowles for U.S. Senate
        Press Secretary
        Raleigh, NC
        March 2004-November 2004

        John Edwards for President
        Deputy Press Secretary
        Raleigh, NC
        August 2003-March 2004

        U.S. Senator John Edwards (D-NC)
        Deputy Press Secretary
        Washington, DC
        October 2001-August 2003

        U.S. Senator Chuck Schumer (D-NY)
        Deputy Press Secretary
        Washington, DC
        August-October 200l

        Fleishman-Hillard
        Assistant Account Executive
        New York, NY
        November 2000-July 2001

        Chris Petrini for State Representative
        Campaign Manager
        Framingham, MA
        June-September 2000

    9. Attach a copy of your resume.
    A copy is attached.
    10. List any advisory, consultative, honorary, or other part-time 
service or positions with Federal, State, or local governments, other 
than those listed above, within the last ten years. Not applicable
    11. List all positions held as an officer, director, trustee, 
partner, proprietor, agent, representative, or consultant of any 
corporation, company, firm, partnership, or other business, enterprise, 
educational, or other institution within the last ten years.

        Unpaid Board member of:
        Results for America (current)
        The Corps Network (current)
        Internet Association (2017-September 2020)
        Family Online Safety Institute (2017-December 2018)

        Employer's Representative to:
        Information Technology Industry Council (2018-2020)

        * If I am confirmed, I will resign my unpaid nonprofit board 
        positions as described in the terms of the ethics agreement I 
        have entered into with DOT's Designated Agency Ethics Official 
        and that has been provided to this Committee.

    12. Please list each membership you have had during the past ten 
years or currently hold with any civic, social, charitable, 
educational, political, professional, fraternal, benevolent or 
religiously affiliated organization, private club, or other membership 
organization. (For this question, you do not have to list your 
religious affiliation or membership in a religious house of worship or 
institution.). Include dates of membership and any positions you have 
held with any organization. Please note whether any such club or 
organization restricts membership on the basis of sex, race, color, 
religion, national origin, age, or disability.

        Unpaid Board member of:
        Results for America (current)
        The Corps Network (current)
        Internet Association (2017-September 2020)
        Family Online Safety Institute (2017-December 2018)

        Employer's Representative to:
        Information Technology Industry Council (2018-2020)

        * If I am confirmed, I will resign my unpaid nonprofit board 
        positions as described in the terms of the ethics agreement I 
        have entered into with DOT's Designated Agency Ethics Official 
        and that has been provided to this Committee.

    13. Have you ever been a candidate for and/or held a public office 
(elected, non-elected, or appointed)? If so, indicate whether any 
campaign has any outstanding debt, the amount, and whether you are 
personally liable for that debt. No.
    14. List all memberships and offices held with and services 
rendered to, whether compensated or not, any political party or 
election committee within the past ten years. If you have held a paid 
position or served in a formal or official advisory position (whether 
compensated or not) in a political campaign within the past ten years, 
identify the particulars of the campaign, including the candidate, year 
of the campaign, and your title and responsibilities.

        Co-Chair: Biden-Harris Infrastructure Policy Committee, May-
        November 2020

    15. Itemize all political contributions to any individual, campaign 
organization, political party, political action committee, or similar 
entity of $200 or more for the past ten years.

        Joseph Biden for President: $250; 2020

        44Fund: $500; 2018

        Brian Forde D-CA for Congress: $900; 2017 [Two Donations]

        Twitter PAC: $4250: 2017-2018 [13 donations]

        Act Blue: $200: 2018, 2019 [Two donations]

    16. List all scholarships, fellowships, honorary degrees, honorary 
society memberships, military medals, and any other special recognition 
for outstanding service or achievements.

        Harvard College: Lyman Scholarship.

        Harvard College Scholarship.

        Harvard College Dean's List.

        Harvard College Research Fellowship.

    17. Please list each book, article, column, Internet blog posting, 
or other publication you have authored, individually or with others. 
Include a link to each publication when possible. Also list any 
speeches that you have given on topics relevant to the position for 
which you have been nominated. Do not attach copies of these 
publications unless otherwise instructed.

Twitter Blogs
        https://blog.twitter.com/en_us/authors.CarlosMonjeJr.html

        Twitter Blogs on election integrity and in support of 
        immigration reform
NPR Interview
        https://www.npr.org/20l8/08/31/643582365/twitter-public-policy-
        director-on-how-company-monitors-content
Book appendix
        https://www.amazon.com/Helping-Good-Do-Better-Advocates/dp/
        1518700166

        Wrote a short chapter appendix to a book about social interest 
        issue advocacy. Chapter is about the reauthorization of the 
        Corporation for National and Community Service.
DOT Civil Rights Event
        https://connectdot.connectsolutions.com/p5okh51olbp/?launcher-
        false&fcsCon
        tent=true&pbMode=normal&proto=true
WH Speeches;
   Various informal stakeholder events to discuss GROW AMERICA 
        Act (Spring 2014)

   Grantmakers Income Security Taskforce--Grantmakers for 
        Children Youth and Families: Budget and Tax Briefing (March 19, 
        2013)

   White House Long-Term Disaster Recovery Working Group, Salt 
        Lake City Session: Closing Remarks (January 18, 2012)

   Philanthropy Northwest 2009 Annual Conference Keynote 
        Address (September 2009)

   Philanthropy and Rural America Conference speech: ``The 
        Social Innovation Fund and Rural America'' (July 2009)

   Stanford Business School Silicon Valley Roundtable for White 
        House Office of Social Innovation (June 23, 2009)

   Entrepreneurship in Education, Center for American Progress 
        Roundtable (May 7, 2009)

   10th Annual Social Enterprise Summit: Keynote Address 
        ``Harnessing Policy Opportunities at the National Level'' 
        (April 17, 2009)

   White House Champions of Change:

     Southwest Border Region September (2011)

     Space Coast Technology and Innovation: June (2011)

     Gulf Coast Oil Spill July (2010)
Federal Publications Contributed to:
   Hurricane Sandy Rebuilding Strategy (August 2013)
        http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/documents/
        huddoc?id=hrsrebuildingstrategy.pdf

   National Disaster Recovery Framework (September 2011)
        http://www.fema.gov/national-disaster-recovery-framework

   Deepwater Horizon Recovery Plan (September 2010)
        http://www.restorethegulf.gov/sites/default/files/documents/
        pdf/gulf-recovery-sep-2010.pdf

   Beyond Traffic 2045. (January 2017)
        https://www.transportation.gov/policy-initiatives/beyond-
        traffic-2045-final-report
Online Content:
   White House Video Message: Continuing to strengthen our 
        economy in 2014 (January 11, 2014)
        http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/20l4/01/11/white-
        house-video-message-continuing-strengthen-our-economy-2014

   A Special Moment for Service (March 27, 2009)
        http://www.nationalservice.gov/newsroom/official-statements/
        2009/special-moment-service

   Innovation with Crawfish Sauce: What a New Orleans Nonprofit 
        Can Teach the Rest of the Country (October 30, 2009)
        http://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2009/10/30/innovation-with-
        crawfish-sauce-what-a-new-orleans-nonprofit-can-teach-rest-
        country
Newspaper articles
        I have numerous articles that I authored due to my employment 
        with The Boston Globe and The Times-Picayune and through my 
        time volunteering with the Harvard Crimson. They are available 
        online through the publications' respective archives and 
        websites, www.bostonglobe.com, www.nola.com. and https://www
        .thecrimson.com/sitemap/

    18. List all digital platforms (including social media and other 
digital content sites) on which you currently or have formerly operated 
an account, regardless of whether or not the account was held in your 
name or an alias. Include the name of an ''alias'' or ``handle'' you 
have used on each of the named platforms. Indicate whether the account 
is active, deleted, or dormant. Include a link to each account if 
possible.

        Twitter:
        https://twitter.com/carlosmonjejr?lang=en

        Facebook:
        https://www.facebook.com/carlos.monje.52

        Instagram:
        https://www.instagram.com/carlosmonje/?hl=en

        LinkedIn:
        https://linkedin.com/in/carlos-monje/

        YouTube:
        https://www.youtube.com/user/carlosmonje211
        Fun and poorly done video with niece and nephews

    19. Please identify each instance in which you have testified 
orally or in writing before Congress in a governmental or non-
governmental capacity and specify the date and subject matter of each 
testimony.
Senate Commerce Committee
        Transportation Safety Nominations Hearing
        December 3, 2014

        Video
        https://www.commerce.senate.gov/2014/12/transportation-safety-
        nominations-hearings

        Testimony
        https://www.commerce.senate.gov/services/files/271DFEA6-1EC9-
        4E69-B275-3F0B801547D6

        How the Internet of Things (IoT) Can Bring U.S. Transportation 
        and Infrastructure into the 21st Century
        June 28, 2016

        Video
        https://www.commerce.senate.gov/2016/6/how-the-internet-of-
        things-iot-can-bring-u-s-transportation-and-infrastructure-
        into-the-21st-century

        Testimony
        https://www.commerce.senate.gov/services/files/E68C638B-FED9-
        4E97-BC84-888DEE86016D

        Terrorism and Social Media: #IsBigTechDoingEnough?
        January 17, 2018

        Video
        https://www.commerce.senate.gov/2018/1/terrorism-and-social-
        media-isbigtechdoingenough

        Testimony
        https://commerce.senate.gov/services/files/447E3321-1215-47BC-
        93EA-AD295CF16D80

        QFRs
        https://www.commerce.senate.gov/services/files/144DB12A-56CD-
        469B-AE64-O61E4C108495
Senate Judiciary Committee
        Stifling Free Speech: Technological Censorship and the Public 
        Disclosure
        April 10, 2019

        Video
        https://www.judiciary.senate.gov/meetings/stifling-free-speech-
        technological-censorship-and-the-public-discourse

        Testimony
        http://www.judiciary.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/
        Monje%20Testimony.pdf

        QFRs
        https://www.judiciary.senate.gov/download/monje-responses-to-
        questions-for-the-record

    20. Given the current mission, major programs, and major 
operational objectives of the department/agency to which you have been 
nominated, what in your background or employment experience do you 
believe affirmatively qualifies you for appointment to the position for 
which you have been nominated, and why do you wish to serve in that 
position?
    The Department of Transportation's mission touches people every 
day. Transportation costs are the second-highest expense for American 
families and disinvestment in our network costs American businesses 
lost productivity. I was the Senate-confirmed head of policy at the 
Department of Transportation during the Obama administration and served 
as Chief of Staff of the Domestic Policy Council, working on an array 
of place-based initiatives to help local leaders accomplish goals for 
their communities.
    21. What do you believe are your responsibilities, if confirmed, to 
ensure that the department/agency has proper management and accounting 
controls, and what experience do you have in managing a large 
organization?
    Upholding the integrity of the Department is a solemn duty of all 
officials at the Department of Transportation. Maintaining proper 
management and accounting controls is key to maintaining the trust of 
this committee, Congress and the American People.
    I have managed very large organizations, including serving as 
Acting Under Secretary at the Department of Transportation, Chief of 
Staff of the Domestic Policy Council, and Deputy Director of Agency 
Review at the Biden-Harris Transition.
    22. What do you believe to be the top three challenges facing the 
department/agency, and why?
    Safety must always be the north star of the Department of 
Transportation. People expect to travel safely to their destination, 
every trip. Successfully addressing complex, multifaceted safety 
challenges requires a comprehensive approach utilizing all the 
authorities and resources at the Department.
    COVID has devastated state departments of transportation and 
transit agencies. We do not yet understand how the pandemic will change 
freight and commuter traffic over the long-term. The Department not 
only needs to help impacted agencies by responsibly allocating the 
financial support provided by Congress, but by helping transport 
planners adjust to the new normal.
    Successfully integrating new technologies into our transportation 
network will require continuously pushing the edges of our regulatory 
ability. This means being willing to adapt quickly while maintaining 
our focus on safety, equity and privacy. It also will mean helping our 
state and local partners develop the capacity to ensure their values 
are front and center as they integrate new technology onto their 
streets and in their skies.
                   b. potential conflicts of interest
    1. Describe all financial arrangements, deferred compensation 
agreements, and other continuing dealings with business associates, 
clients, or customers. Please include information related to retirement 
accounts.
    None. My arrangements are fully described in Part 3 of my Public 
Financial Disclosure Report.
    2. Do you have any commitments or agreements, formal or informal, 
to maintain employment, affiliation, or practice with any business, 
association or other organization during your appointment? If so, 
please explain.
    No. If I am confirmed, I will resign my unpaid nonprofit board 
positions as described in the terms of the ethics agreement I have 
entered into with DOT's Designated Agency Ethics Official and that has 
been provided to this Committee.
    3. Indicate any investments, obligations, liabilities, or other 
relationships which could involve potential conflicts of interest in 
the position to which you have been nominated. Explain how you will 
resolve each potential conflict of interest.
    In connection with the nomination process, I have consulted with 
the Office of the Government Ethics and the Department of 
Transportation's Designated Agency Ethics Official to identify 
potential conflicts of interest. Any potential conflicts of interest 
will be resolved in accordance with the terms of the ethics agreement I 
have entered into with DOT's Designated Agency Ethics Official and that 
has been provided to this Committee. I am not aware of any other 
potential conflicts of interest.
    4. Describe any business relationship, dealing, or financial 
transaction which you have had during the last ten years, whether for 
yourself, on behalf of a client, or acting as an agent, that could in 
any way constitute or result in a possible conflict of interest in the 
position to which you have been nominated. Explain how you will resolve 
each potential conflict of interest.
    In connection with the nomination process, I have consulted with 
the Office of the Government Ethics and the Department of 
Transportation's Designated Agency Ethics Official to identify 
potential conflicts of interest. Any potential conflicts of interest 
will be resolved in accordance with the terms of the ethics agreement I 
have entered into with DOT's Designated Agency Ethics Official and that 
has been provided to this Committee. I am not aware of any other 
potential conflicts of interest.
    5. Identify any other potential conflicts of interest, and explain 
how you will resolve each potential conflict of interest.
    In connection with the nomination process, I have consulted with 
the Office of the Government Ethics and the Department of 
Transportation's Designated Agency Ethics Official to identify 
potential conflicts of interest. Any potential conflicts of interest 
will be resolved in accordance with the terms of the ethics agreement I 
have entered into with DOT's Designated Agency Ethics Official and that 
has been provided to this Committee. I am not aware of any other 
potential conflicts of interest.
    6. Describe any activity during the past ten years, including the 
names of clients represented, in which you have been engaged for the 
purpose of directly or indirectly influencing the passage, defeat, or 
modification of any legislation or affecting the administration and 
execution of law or public policy.
    I never qualified as a registered lobbyist in my role at Twitter, 
but I have provided advice related to the advocacy of certain executive 
and legislative outcomes, including passage of immigration reform and 
privacy protections.
                            c. legal matters
    1. Have you ever been disciplined or cited for a breach of ethics, 
professional misconduct, or retaliation by, or been the subject of a 
complaint to, any court, administrative agency, the Office of Special 
Counsel, professional association, disciplinary committee, or other 
professional group? If yes:

  a.  Provide the name of agency, association, committee, or group;

  b.  Provide the date the citation, disciplinary action, complaint, or 
        personnel action was issued or initiated;

  c.  Describe the citation, disciplinary action, complaint, or 
        personnel action;

  d.  Provide the results of the citation, disciplinary action, 
        complaint, or personnel action.
    Not applicable
    2. Have you ever been investigated, arrested, charged, or held by 
any Federal, State, or other law enforcement authority of any Federal, 
State, county, or municipal entity, other than for a minor traffic 
offense? If so, please explain.
    Not applicable
    3. Have you or any business or nonprofit of which you are or were 
an officer ever been involved as a party in an administrative agency 
proceeding, criminal proceeding, or civil litigation? If so, please 
explain.
    Not applicable
    4. Have you ever been convicted (including pleas of guilty or nolo 
contendere) of any criminal violation other than a minor traffic 
offense? If so, please explain.
    Not applicable
    5. Have you ever been accused, formally or informally, of sexual 
harassment or discrimination on the basis of sex, race, religion, or 
any other basis? If so, please explain.
    Not applicable
    6. Please advise the Committee of any additional information, 
favorable or unfavorable, which you feel should be disclosed in 
connection with your nomination.
    The men and women who work at the Department of Transportation are 
rightfully proud of the expertise and commitment to excellence in 
completing their mission, and it would be the honor of my career to 
serve in this role helping lead them.
                     d. relationship with committee
    l. Will you ensure that your department/agency complies with 
deadlines for information set by congressional committees, and that 
your department/agency endeavors to timely comply with requests for 
information from individual Members of Congress, including requests 
from members in the minority? Yes
    2. Will you ensure that your department/agency does whatever it can 
to protect congressional witnesses and whistle blowers from reprisal 
for their testimony and disclosures? Yes
    3. Will you cooperate in providing the Committee with requested 
witnesses, including technical experts and career employees, with 
firsthand knowledge of matters of interest to the Committee? Yes
    4. Are you willing to appear and testify before any duly 
constituted committee of the Congress on such occasions as you may be 
reasonably requested to do so? Yes
                                 ______
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 

    The Chairwoman. Thank you, Mr. Monje. Each of you represent 
such important investments, economic strategies, science issues 
to the Pacific Northwest. I could literally, I am sure, spend 
hours asking you questions today, each of you. But I am going 
to have to be succinct because there is important data to get 
on the table. First with you, Mr. Monje, could you just tell me 
whether you support money going to mega projects? I am 
concerned that mega projects that are the lifeblood of fixing 
big economic issues for our country always get left behind 
because they cost so much. Are you supportive of making sure in 
this next package we address mega projects?
    Mr. Monje. Yes, ma'am, absolutely. These are projects that 
are very difficult to fund because they cross different modes, 
different jurisdictions, different states. Columbia River 
Bridge is a great example of that but there are examples all 
across the country of projects that, if they were to fail, 
would really hamstring the economy and stop people from getting 
to where they need to go.
    The Chairwoman. Thank you. We will look forward to working 
with you on that. Col. Melroy, could you explain why resiliency 
and redundancy in system operations--I did not know of your 
role on the Columbia oversight, but that just--you know, I 
think it is hard to explain how when we change in the 
integration of systems, that somehow in not testing, you know, 
the individual parts to the overall system as we found with O 
rings, we missed something, right. We missed a malfunction at a 
temperature level. So when we look at Artemis and what we are 
doing, why is resiliency and redundancy so important? And if 
you could just throw in a few comments about why Artemis is, 
yes, a moon project, but it is a precursor to Mars.
    Colonel Melroy. Thank you, Chair Cantwell. Yes, I think 
there is many examples of why redundancy is important, 
particularly in space transportation options. And Columbia is a 
great example. It was very challenging to continue to build the 
International Space Station following that and the amount of 
logistics that it takes to support people in science in space 
show us that having resiliency and redundancy in our 
transportation options are extremely important.
    As far as Artemis, I think I see it as a systems 
engineering problem. All of the pieces have to work together 
and there have to be multiple backups. And to me, that is the 
meaning of resiliency. It allows you to have hiccups, which you 
will occasionally have with new technologies, unforeseen 
circumstances going forward, especially in operations, and 
allows you to protect the mission and protect the safety of 
those involved.
    The Chairwoman. Thank you. And is this a precursor to the 
efforts that we are trying to do beyond the Moon?
    Colonel Melroy. Yes, Senator, it is incredibly important 
that we learn how to do operations and develop the technologies 
that will allow us to go on to Mars, which is a much more 
challenging journey. So we are talking a few days to the moon 
and 6 months at a minimum to Mars. So being able to exercise 
those technologies on the moon and really understand lunar 
operations is what will prepare us to go to Mars as quickly as 
possible.
    The Chairwoman. Thank you. Dr. Spinrad, we had a chance to 
catch up about salmon in general. And thank you for your 
opening statement on a variety of things. I guarantee you, I 
have had conversations with our colleague, Senator Blackburn, 
about using supercomputing time for better analysis of weather. 
And, you know, we had another incident where we lost a crew 
that may be better with weather data and information could have 
helped us in that. So we definitely need better weather 
information.
    Thank you for focusing on tsunami in the Northwest. Can't--
I mean, we focus on the tsunami warning system and what we need 
to do in advance. But I really want to focus on salmon. You and 
I had a chance to talk about salmon, particularly as it related 
to some of the issues like fixing culverts and habitat and the 
impacts of pollution. And you suggested that, you know, 
focusing on this with new levels of science could give us, you 
know, better returns. That is focusing on systems like the 
Chesapeake or Puget Sound as an ecosystem and impacts with new 
science available today could give us better interest and 
information.
    And I just wanted to ask, too, whether this is where you 
see the best return for our dollars, you know, these big, you 
know, big estuaries, if you will.
    Mr. Spinrad. Thank you, Chair Cantwell, for that. I would 
characterize that as one of the critical questions for food 
security, National Security, economic security. Your question 
invokes elements of habitat protection, it invokes elements of 
sustainably managing natural resources, and, of course, it 
invokes issues associated with rebuilding critical 
infrastructure.
    I do believe that what some people are calling the urban 
ocean, and that is exactly the geographies you have talked 
about, places like Puget Sound, San Francisco Bay, Chesapeake 
Bay, represent critical areas for focus of not just research, 
but applications of that research to solutions to ensure we are 
sustaining these natural resources, including salmon, Pacific 
salmon.
    And I would point out, obviously in Puget Sound, it also 
deals with endangered species such as the orca population who 
depend on the salmon as well. In short, I believe the solution 
does lie in two things, one of which you identified, which is 
the best science, the best observations, the best predictive 
capabilities, using exactly the kind of high performance 
computers that you alluded to. But another key point is the 
active engagement from the get-go with the local communities, 
local Governments, jurisdictions, tribal councils.
    After all, if we talk about the salmon in Puget Sound, the 
habitat protection is part of the tribal treaty rights. So I 
think the combination of the best science, the best 
communication of that science, and if you will, a whole of 
Government approach, including Federal and State and tribal 
entities will lead us to the solutions we need.
    The Chairwoman. Well, we definitely believe in a whole of 
Government approach and on the Yakima Basin Project, which was 
shifting to a holistic approach to water management, getting 
more efficiency out of the system and returning salmon where we 
could, and yet still--we worked together and came up with a 
collaborative solution. So what do you think here might be a 
science that we can help people understand might emerge from 
this that would help us?
    You know, is it, you know, a return of spawning, is that 
some information? You know, we worked with the University of 
Washington on when climate was impacting our shellfish industry 
and the complexity of literally for a very small grant, I think 
it was $100,000 to $200,000, figured out that we should be 
doing seeding for shellfish at a different time because of the 
temperature change in the water. Well, that translated into a 
big result for the climate impacts on the shellfish industry. 
So is there something here that we should be looking at?
    Mr. Spinrad. Absolutely, Senator. I would say there are a 
few components. You alluded to the biological. We have to have 
the best understanding of how the ecosystem operates. There is 
a physical aspect to this. You talked about some of the 
pollution. How does that get distributed? What is the fate and 
effects of pollutants that may enter the Sound? There is a 
hydrological challenge.
    There was a wonderful story in The Seattle Times just a few 
days ago about the different culverts and how effective or 
ineffective they are in transporting water and allowing the 
salmon up into their spawning grounds. And I would also point 
out a critical component of this is developing solutions that 
are long standing and withstanding, especially in the context 
of climate change. So will the solutions of 2021 work in 2025 
or 2030?
    So predictions and projections about how that climate will 
change, the hydrology, the flow of the rivers into the Puget 
Sound and the circulation in Puget Sound, all of those have to 
be part of the solution.
    The Chairwoman. Thank you. And Mr. Monje, just so you know, 
we believe that since culverts have been such a--had a dramatic 
effect, that when we are looking at new transportation 
infrastructure investment, we should be thinking about these 
things. We call it salmon infrastructure, but we are talking 
about the negative impacts and preventing the negative impacts 
or dealing with the stormwater runoff issue. So anyway, so it 
is all--it is connected and so we appreciate it. Thank you very 
much. We are going to turn to Senator Fischer.

                STATEMENT OF HON. DEB FISCHER, 
                   U.S. SENATOR FROM NEBRASKA

    Senator Fischer. Thank you, Madam Chair. Mr. Monje, in 2019 
then Secretary Chao established the Rural Opportunities to Use 
Transportation for Economic Success, or the ROUTES initiative. 
The purpose of the initiative is to better understand the 
infrastructure needs in rural areas as well as to provide 
information to rural communities unavailable to DOT and grant 
programs. The Undersecretary of Transportation for Policy 
oversees this initiative. Would you agree that this initiative 
will help DOT better understand and respond to rural 
transportation infrastructure needs?
    Mr. Monje. Yes, Senator. We know that our rural areas have 
disproportionate share of crashes, that the needs in rural 
communities are substantial. I think the Chao team and the 
Trump Administration deserve a lot of credit for their emphasis 
on rural areas. And you know, my last time at the Department of 
Transportation, I was able to travel all around the country to 
see these projects and how critical they are. I vow to work 
with you to make sure that the Department continues to be a 
better partner so that rural areas compete for and get the 
limited dollars that we have and that they can use them to best 
serve their constituents.
    Senator Fischer. You know, you and I, I think, have had a 
great visit and a good discussion also about the needs of more 
rural areas to have assistance when it comes to grant writing 
and how to prepare their grants to make them more competitive 
throughout all the programs that are there at the Department of 
Transportation. Could you just address that a little bit?
    Mr. Monje. Yes, ma'am. And so I think the Congress, in its 
wisdom, has as established a number of minimums when it comes 
to what percentage of funds can go to rural areas. And I know 
that the career team that is part of the Undersecretary's 
Office takes great pride in the work that they do to provide 
technical assistance to applicants so that they can get a 
project further down the pike. And that is true not only for 
the competitive grant programs, but also for the financing 
programs. And I know that there has been an effort through the 
TIFIA program to make sure that rural projects can compete for 
and get those dollars as well.
    You know, I was able to visit a short line railroad in 
South Dakota that really it is a mom and pop operation, and 
they are the lifeblood to a number of communities that they 
serve and was able to go to a rural outpost in Mississippi 
where the bridges are so weight limited that the busses have to 
go a half hour out of the way for school kids, which means that 
is, you know, it is an hour of a kid's life that you are taking 
away from being able to do homework or spend time on with their 
families.
    So this is something that is important to the Secretary. It 
is important to me. And you have my commitment that we are 
going to continue the progress.
    Senator Fischer. Thank you. We also discussed the reports 
of significant freight backlogs across the country, especially 
at port facilities, but it affects other modes as well. I 
understand that you recently took part in a discussion with the 
Department of Agriculture on this issue. What are your thoughts 
on how we can address the issue and what do you believe is the 
Department of Transportation's role in that?
    Mr. Monje. Thank you for that question. It is--you know, 
our supply chain is brittle. And, you know, there are a number 
of reasons why I think as a Government and over the long term, 
we need to work on our export strategy so that we have got more 
goods that are flowing overseas. Right now, it is almost a one 
way cycle, and it creates inefficiencies at every stage of the 
process. And, you know, it was already a system that was, that 
needed investment, but at a time when Americans stayed home, 
they bought things, cardboard boxes were going all around the 
country.
    But we didn't catch up on the export side as well. You 
couple that with labor shortages caused by COVID and it 
resulted in small backlogs that snowballed. So in the immediate 
term, we have been talking with all of the stakeholders across 
the supply chain to try to push for additional efficiencies. I 
believe moving to a 24/7 schedule at the West Coast ports could 
be fairly substantial over the medium term, focusing on exports 
on our supply chain and our freight strategies.
    And then over the long term, and with the help of Congress, 
identifying funding so that we can invest in intermodal 
facilities, so we can get containers off of ships onto trains, 
on the big rigs, and get--and de-conflict them with traffic in 
the ports where they are. And that is true on all the coasts. 
It is also true inside the country as well where we need to 
have intermodal facilities that are focused on getting 
containers off of trains, getting other goods onto trucks and 
where they belong.
    Senator Fischer. And then I would just like you to think 
about this, I am out of time, but we have a real backlog when 
it comes to environmental impact statements, the approval time 
at the FAA and FHWA. It gets longer than that across other 
agencies. And we all know that adds costs to any kind of 
project that is going to be undertaken.
    So hopefully we can have a conversation in the future about 
how we can streamline those costs, stretch our tax dollars, to 
be able to take on some big infrastructure projects. So, thank 
you, sir. Thank you, Madam Chair.

                STATEMENT OF HON. BRIAN SCHATZ, 
                    U.S. SENATOR FROM HAWAII

    Senator Schatz. Thank you, Senator Fischer. I will------
    Senator Fischer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Senator Schatz. Thank you. Dr. Spinrad, I want to talk to 
you about Papahanaumokuakea, a Marine national monument. You 
and I have both worked to protect Papahanaumokuakea. You know 
its significance, but our monument covers 483,000 square miles 
of some of the most ecologically important waters in the 
Pacific Ocean. Will you support a robust designation process 
for Papahanaumokuakea?
    Mr. Spinrad. Thank you, Senator Schatz. And I would start 
by saying that I was proud to be part of NOAA during the 
monument designation for Papahanaumokuakea, and you have my 
commitment to initiate the designation process, if I am 
confirmed as NOAA Administrator.
    Senator Schatz. Thank you. And can we talk about adequate 
funding for the monument, especially when you are talking about 
nearly 500,000 square miles. You know, there is a little bit of 
a danger of it being a paper monument that especially NGOs and 
even legislators and politicians of both parties are able to 
claim credit for having preserved something. But without 
adequate resources, you are not really getting the job done. 
And so this means money for management, for science, for 
enforcement, for native Hawaiian culture, and for maritime 
history. Do I have your commitment to work on adequately 
resourcing the monument?
    Mr. Spinrad. Thank you, Senator. One of the precepts that I 
would come into this job with, if confirmed, is that budget 
justification be a robust process within the agency so that 
justification for resources for all of NOAA's activities, 
including management of monuments, sanctuaries, national 
estuarine research reserves, be predicate and justified on the 
needs, as you described, in terms of personnel for the science 
that is needed and the operational costs. You have my 
commitment to make sure that those justifications are strong 
and adequate to meet the requirements.
    Senator Schatz. Thank you. Want to talk to you a little bit 
about aquaculture. My first job out of college was at the Sea 
Grant Extension Service. And I think now that I am in the 
Senate, people assume I was a Sea Grant extension agent. I was 
not. I was a project assistant, which meant really I just cut 
the hau bush, which is a weed, and fed the fish at a 10 acre 
fish farm on the Northeast side of Oahu.
    I have taken an interest in aquaculture ever since because 
I think when you look at a projected 10 billion people on the 
planet, this is going to be one of the most healthy and 
sustainable sources of protein going forward. The Ranking 
Member of the Full Committee, Roger Wicker, and I have worked 
really hard on legislation.
    Do you support aquaculture generally? Do you think there is 
a need for legislation? What do you see your role, if 
confirmed, in assisting us in moving this project forward?
    Mr. Spinrad. Thank you, Senator, for your question on this. 
And also thank you for your co-sponsorship of legislation 
addressing what I consider to be a critical food security issue 
for our Nation. It is--aquaculture has been demonstrated to be 
doable technology across the board. I think the challenges end 
up being ones of regulatory controls and standards. So I 
support working on those standards and regulatory controls.
    I would point out just recently I was--received an 
endorsement from the National Aquaculture Association, which I 
take as a very precious endorsement and one which I would, if 
confirmed, use to have the dialog both with the industry and 
with the Hill here to talk about how we might get to a solution 
scientifically based to address what I consider a critical food 
security challenge for the Nation.
    Senator Schatz. Thank you very much. I very much look 
forward to working with you on this. This is an area of 
bipartisan cooperation, enormous potential. And I think, you 
know, unfortunately, not so much in this committee, but 
certainly throughout the Congress, just because something isn't 
being fought over doesn't mean it is not important.
    This could be absolutely revolutionary in terms of the way 
we produce protein for ourselves and have strategies to both 
adapt to a changing climate, but also fight against climate 
change and work on conservation. So thank you for those two 
commitments on Papa and on aquaculture. Mr. Monje, the Safe 
Streets for All proposal in the American Jobs Plan, the 
Administration is saying a lot of the right things around safe 
streets, and I have had great conversations with the Secretary 
in this space.
    My experience, however, both at the county and State level 
and at the Federal level is that safe streets always get 
siloed, right. That there is this sort of serious engineer 
types, the money people where most of the money flows, where 
most of the real work gets done, right. The Federal Highway 
Administration goes to the State fund and all the sort of big 
boys and girls decide how to spend that money. And then if you 
can break off a little bit for the bike people, right. Or the 
AARP and their safe routes to school or safe routes in the 
neighborhoods and that is kind of the way it is viewed.
    And I would like your reassurance that it is not going to 
be siloed, that it is going to be integrated into the way we 
think about this. And I know the Secretary believes this, but, 
you know, the Secretary can't operate the whole agency. It is 
too big for that. And so it is going to take mechanically 
thinking through all of the money flows, all of the 
decisionmaking, just to make sure that this doesn't end up 
being some sort of side pilot project.
    Can you help us to think through how to make sure that, a, 
this doesn't get siloed, and b, this doesn't swing back and 
forth depending on whether the President is a Democrat or a 
Republican?
    Mr. Monje. I think that is an excellent question, sir, and 
one that we are trying to begin. And just to point a couple of 
things is that in the American Jobs Plan, significant 
investments for exactly the kinds of things you are talking 
about, whether it is setting aside money through the ASEP 
program, making sure that we are fixing it right as we rebuild 
our transportation networks.
    And also in our staff and who we have decided to put in 
these critical positions, including notably former State and 
local officials who are leading our safety work in the Office 
of the Secretary and in the Highway Administration.
    Senator Schatz. Thank you very much. Senator Warnock.

              STATEMENT OF HON. RAPHAEL WARNOCK, 
                   U.S. SENATOR FROM GEORGIA

    Senator Warnock. OK, thank you so very much, Chair. I 
appreciate the opportunity of--my colleagues are probably 
getting tired of hearing me brag about Georgia, but Georgia has 
one of the most impressive transportation networks in the 
country, from the Hartsfield Jackson International Airport to 
the port of Savannah, to over 4,600 miles of rail, to nearly 
128,400 miles of public road. Our transportation system allows 
over 10.6 million Georgians to get where they need to go work, 
school, church, grocery store.
    It is also the backbone of our economy, with more than 
362,000 jobs tied to freight and logistics and over 2 million 
jobs dependent on the efficient movement of freight. Over the 
next 30 years, our population is expected to grow nearly 30 
percent to 13.8 million. Our State is also expecting a nearly 
50 percent increase in freight over the next 25 years.
    Preparing for this future means making transformational 
investments. Mr. Monje, if confirmed, what policies and 
programs would you recommend to ensure our transportation 
system is still able to safely, efficiently, and affordably 
move Georgians and Georgia products?
    Mr. Monje. Thank you, Senator. The--you know, my two 
sisters live in suburban Atlanta, and I don't think I have 
experienced worse traffic than going up 75 and 85 up into 
Northern Atlanta suburbs. But when I think about, you know, the 
entire State of Georgia, you got to remember the port of 
Savannah, as you mentioned, the fourth largest container port 
in the country, the incredibly thoughtful work that is going 
into some of the efforts to reconnect disconnected communities 
in Atlanta.
    The Beltline, which is a great example of multimodal 
opportunities, turning assets into something that creates land 
value and then having created finance programs to capture that 
and re-invest it into the community. I think the jobs plan is a 
great place to start for the State of Georgia. And the 
investments that are made in our roads, in our transit, and in 
our intermodal freight facilities is really going to be key to 
the future of the people of Georgia.
    Investing in MARTA, investing in the streetcar in Atlanta. 
These are all critical projects and I do look forward to 
working with you, if confirmed, to help you and the State of 
Georgia to accomplish its goals.
    Senator Warnock. Absolutely, and I know a little bit about 
that traffic that you are talking about and is the reason I am 
very excited to work alongside Chair Cantwell on a new program 
that would help fund megamodal projects to address some of 
these transportation issues. And I look forward to working with 
you to address the ways in which historically there are 
neighborhoods that have literally been cut into or physically 
isolated or displaced by infrastructure.
    And so we have, I think, a historic opportunity to connect 
rather than disconnect people and resources through the 
American Jobs Plan's infrastructure investments. Thank you. I 
look forward to working with this committee and Congress on a 
surface transportation bill and infrastructure program that 
would be helpful not only to Georgians, but to the American 
people.
    Senator Schatz. Do we have Senator Blackburn online? If 
not, Senator Peters.

                STATEMENT OF HON. GARY PETERS, 
                   U.S. SENATOR FROM MICHIGAN

    Senator Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Dr. Spinrad, an 
unexpected severe flooding, as you know, has too often upended 
the lives of families and hard working men and women in my 
state of Michigan, but all across the Nation. And that is why I 
was pleased to join with Ranking Member Wicker in re-
introducing our bipartisan bill, the Floods Act, which recently 
passed out of this committee. Our bill would help protect 
families and small businesses along highway shorelines and 
other communities by modernizing NOAA's flood forecast to 
provide certainly more timely or actionable information, which 
is essential as we face climate change.
    NOAA's forecasting capabilities also position the agency to 
support the implementation of projects and programs that make 
communities more resilient to climate change. So my question to 
you, sir, is how do you envision utilizing NOAA's unique 
programs and expertise to prioritize helping communities 
prepare for and mitigate the impact of climate change?
    Mr. Spinrad. Thank you, Senator, for that critical 
question. I would point out as a predicate to my response that 
last year we saw more than $20 billion natural disasters in 
this country and those numbers continue to take a general trend 
up of which flooding is just one example. NOAA has a rich 
history in the drought arena. And if you will bear with me for 
a moment, I would point out that the efforts that were 
undertaken about a decade ago for developing a national 
integrated drought information system I think are a model for 
how we can move forward to address the flooding issue. The work 
that you have done and your co-sponsorship on flood 
legislation, I think is an example of how NOAA can focus and 
expand its capabilities.
    I would argue that NOAA working very closely with the 
communities, with the State legislatures, with the private 
weather industry as well to develop and improve forecasts is an 
essential function of the agency, especially in the context of 
climate change, where the kinds of issues you have described 
are apt to become even more problematic.
    So NOAA's rich history of moving science into operations, 
as exemplified by something like the drought efforts, I think 
can be parlayed into similar kinds of information systems for 
use by policymakers and decisionmakers for flood mitigation as 
well.
    Senator Peters. Well, I appreciate that. And as you know, 
Dr. Spinrad, over the past decade, water levels in the Great 
Lakes have fluctuated a great deal which have contributed to 
some of the problems that you just mentioned there. And we are 
seeing things like winter ice covers decreasing, average water 
temperatures have risen, all related to what we are seeing 
broadly with climate change. And I certainly believe it is 
critically important that we monitor and track these changes.
    When you think about protecting drinking water, the fact 
that nearly 40 million people drink water out of the Great 
Lakes, there is impacts to biodiversity, invasive species, 
algal blooms, no shortage of challenges that this body of water 
faces right now. And so my question to you is, how will you 
work with the Great Lakes region in particular to collect the 
data and to monitor these changes in the environment?
    And what priorities in general, given the list that I gave, 
the list is longer--what priorities would you bring to this 
position to deal with the myriad of challenges the Great Lakes 
currently face?
    Mr. Spinrad. Thank you again, Senator Peters. I am very 
proud, I should point out, that when I was the head of research 
at NOAA, I actively tried to foster the Great Lakes observing 
system as a component of the integrated ocean observing system 
in the United States. And I also had under my authority the 
Great Lakes Environmental Research Lab in Ann Arbor. I would 
point to those two--those two activities, GLOS as it is called, 
the Great Lakes Observing System, Gloral as well, in addition 
to the many, many weather forecast offices in the states 
surrounding the Great Lakes as the tools that are already at 
the ready, if you will.
    If confirmed, I will commit to you that NOAA will ensure 
that the focus on developing improved skill and expanded range 
of products and services associated with everything from 
harmful algal blooms to ice cover to surface temperature to 
lake levels will be an important component, a critical 
component of the NOAA portfolio.
    And I look forward to working with you and the rest of the 
delegations from the Great Lakes states to ensure we are 
meeting the needs and requirements of the communities in the 
Great Lakes.
    Senator Peters. Well, I appreciate that commitment, and if 
confirmed, I will be knocking on your door an awful lot. So 
look forward to working with you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Senator Schatz. Thank you. Senator Peters. I have one final 
question for Mr. Monje. In March, the NTSB issued 
recommendations on increasing safety requirements and oversight 
for commercial air tour operators. The recommendations follow a 
simple concept, that if an operator carries revenue passengers, 
they should be held to a higher safety standard than general 
aviation and recreational pilots. Do you agree that revenue 
passengers--that revenue passenger carrying operators should be 
held to a higher safety standards, as NTSB suggests?
    Mr. Monje. Yes, sir. And I do note that the legislation 
that you introduced and trying to make sure that the 
requirements for the part 91 and part 135 are harmonized and 
that we are protecting folks. The number of people who are 
getting involved in accidents is unacceptably high.
    Senator Schatz. I look forward to working with you on that, 
if confirmed.
    Mr. Monje. Yes, sir.
    Senator Schatz. Senator Blackburn.

              STATEMENT OF HON. MARSHA BLACKBURN, 
                  U.S. SENATOR FROM TENNESSEE

    Senator Blackburn. Thank you. And thank you to each of you 
for taking your time to be here this morning and apologies that 
we're all in and out. We have about three things that are going 
on at the same time. Mr. Monje, and I am saying your name 
correctly, right?
    Mr. Monje. Thank you for asking. It is Monje.
    Senator Blackburn. Monje. OK, thank you. I appreciate the 
time on the phone. And I will tell you, we were a little 
surprised to see a day of notice that the Acting Director over 
at the Highway Administration was going to Memphis today on the 
bridge. There was no notice, no prior notice to our offices, no 
way to get individuals. There is no list of who he is being met 
with. What the assessment is going to contain. So we are a 
little bit frustrated with this process. I am certain that you 
can appreciate that. This is a major East, West corridor. The 
bridge is out.
    It goes through, right through the City of Memphis. So this 
is problematic. And at this point, we still do not have a 
response from Secretary Buttigieg as to whether he is going to 
go to Memphis, and when he is expecting to be on the ground in 
Memphis to tend to this situation, to assess this situation. So 
I hope that you understand that there is frustration. Do we 
know when the Secretary is going? You and I had discussed that 
earlier this week.
    Mr. Monje. I don't know that personally, but we will get 
back to you as soon as possible. I can tell you that, as you 
mentioned, our Highway Administrator, the Acting Administrator 
is there today, meeting right now with Tennessee and Arkansas 
State leaders.
    We have been in contact with them daily. Worked with the 
Coast Guard to reopen the river, which is a critical way, to 
get supplies up and down the chain. Worked very quickly to--
with the Tennessee Department of Transportation to, I believe 
they let a contract on Friday, awarded it on Monday. We were 
able to----
    Senator Blackburn. They did that on Monday. That is 
correct. That was done Monday afternoon, so but when we spoke 
with the Secretary on Friday, we were a bit frustrated that 
there was not an awareness. Or let me phrase it like this, 
there was not a timeline for assessment, there was not a 
timeline to move to a mitigation plan. And we are continuing to 
try to work in partnership with Arkansas and Tennessee and with 
the local and State officials.
    So being a little bit more forthcoming would be helpful to 
us as we address this process. Let me go to a question for you 
on the motorcoach industry. We have talked about this a little 
bit also. There are numerous issues with the search funding 
portal through Treasury. So if you would address how DOT is 
working with Treasury to ensure these funds get out the door as 
quickly as possible and what you are doing about those search 
funds?
    Mr. Monje. Yes, ma'am. And if I can go back to the previous 
topic just to thank you for your leadership in pushing all the 
State and Federal leaders to address the situation quickly. On 
the search program, very glad that our team was able to work 
with the Department of the Treasury to help them structure the 
program. Treasury is very good at putting out money, but they 
are not familiar with the bus and other operators that are the 
intended recipients of that program.
    I am very glad that the notice went out on the 6th of May, 
and we stand ready and are actually providing staff to help 
judge and adjudicate the applicants that come in to make sure 
that we can get that assistance that Congress put out as 
quickly as possible and as fairly as possible.
    Senator Blackburn. OK, thank you. Dr. Spinrad, Oak Ridge 
National Labs, and thank you for your time to talk. You know, 
they have been providing a supercomputing platform and some 
expertise for NOAA scientists. And we talked about the 
algorithmic utilization for predicting storms. The NCRC is 
defining the leading edge of computer modeling dealing with 
weather and with global climate simulations. So I would like 
for you to talk for the record a little bit about how you see 
that collaboration between DOE and NOAA progressing as we use 
the computer based modeling.
    Mr. Spinrad. Thank you, Senator. This is a critical 
component of how our Nation moves forward. That is to say, the 
ability to use high performance computing to develop improved 
models of weather and climate. The long history that NOAA 
enjoys with the Department of Energy generally and with Oak 
Ridge National Lab for those computational resources has been 
critical to advance that capability. My own personal sense is 
that the weather and climate modeling community is always 
chasing more and more powerful computational resources.
    If confirmed, I can assure you that I will look into how 
the rich history that NOAA has enjoyed with DOE Oak Ridge is 
pursuable in the future to see if there is even more power that 
we can put into this critical national problem associated with 
addressing predictions and projections of climate and weather.
    Senator Blackburn. Thank you for that. And as we discussed, 
we are really grateful that Oak Ridge is in Tennessee, and 
really all Tennesseans hold a sense of pride for the work that 
the scientists are doing there at Oak Ridge, whether it is with 
nuclear power, whether it is with the algorithmic modeling, 
whether it is with medical isotopes. Some of the work that they 
are doing there is going to benefit everyone in this country. 
And we are grateful for good, smart minds that know how to put 
that to good use. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Senator Schatz. Thank you, Senator Blackburn. Senator 
Rosen.

                STATEMENT OF HON. JACKY ROSEN, 
                    U.S. SENATOR FROM NEVADA

    Senator Rosen. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I appreciate it. And 
appreciate everyone's willingness to serve and the work that 
you have already done in your fields so far. And so I want to 
talk a little bit about women in STEM, women in space. And so, 
Col. Melroy, the Artemis program and NASA aims to put that 
first woman on the moon. As the second woman to ever command a 
space shuttle mission at NASA, you have played a pivotal role 
in paving the way for this to be a possibility.
    And however, I know that you know this, we still have a 
significant gap in representation in space. And so, if 
confirmed, you would only be the fourth woman in NASA history 
to be confirmed as Deputy Administrator. So, of course, in 
order to address such gaps, research has it is critical to 
offer STEM opportunities and workforce development both to 
girls at an early age and to women as they progress through 
their careers.
    And so during Administrator Nelson's confirmation a few 
weeks ago, I was pleased to hear of the continued support of 
these efforts, particularly the NASA EPSCor program, a joint 
Federal State program designed to allow more states like Nevada 
participate in space and aeronautics research.
    So, Col. Melroy, maybe you want to talk about why you think 
it is important for NASA to invest in STEM, particularly 
amongst women, underrepresented minorities. What can we do 
better so we can increase our diversity?
    Colonel Melroy. Thank you, Senator Rosen. I imagine that 
you were also a role model for your constituency as you have a 
background in computer science. It is important to see role 
models. NASA funds STEM in every state of the country. That 
isn't to say that there is not more to do. We all know it is a 
very leaky pipeline. And as you pointed out, we have to address 
every step of that phase, K through 12, undergraduate, 
graduate, and further on in the career. We have to work 
together.
    I think it is very important that all Departments and 
agencies work together in this area. NASA co-chairs of an 
interagency committee called Co-STEM to address those very 
issues. But of course, I just have to add that as a little 
girl, I was inspired by the Apollo program. There were no women 
astronauts at that time, but I was so inspired, I went on to 
become a space shuttle commander.
    And I personally believe that NASA plays an essential role 
in actually executing missions like Artemis and on to Mars to 
inspire that next generation.
    Senator Rosen. Now, thank you, I have a bill out there that 
is going to focus on STEM returnships for women who might be 
mid-career, who stepped off the career track, maybe to be a 
caregiver for a child or family member or wanting to change, 
and introduce them and increase their STEM education so that 
they can return to the workforce to be productive in those 
areas.
    So I look forward to working with you on that. But I want 
to turn quickly to a highway infrastructure and I-11, Nevada, 
one of the fastest growing states in the Nation. We had the 
third highest population growth in 2020. And so a new highway 
is essential to our prosperity. And so, we are proposing 
Interstate 11 would run from the Mexican border through Phoenix 
and Las Vegas all the way up into Reno, where some of the major 
metropolitan areas have never been connected by an interstate. 
It is really important for tourism, for trade and export.
    I am the Chairwoman of the Tourism Export Promotion 
Subcommittee, and so this is critically important. So I have 
asked both Secretary Buttigieg and Deputy Secretary Trottenberg 
to move forward on their commitment to move forward on I-11. I 
would like to get yours as well.
    So, Mr. Monje, would you commit to working with me and the 
rest of the Nevada, Arizona delegations to support the efforts 
to fund, develop, construct and expand I-11 so that Nevada and 
Arizona can improve our corridors, improve our economies, and 
bring visitors and jobs to our state?
    Mr. Monje. Yes, ma'am. I look forward to working with you 
on that project.
    Senator Rosen. Thank you. I appreciate that. And then 
speaking of tourism as well, if anyone has--and you can tune in 
to this and see on every Friday and Sunday, the I-15 corridor 
between Las Vegas and Southern California is literally bumper 
to bumper every weekend. And so we have some of the similar 
issues along Interstate 80 up in the North part of our state, 
connecting Nevada with California and Utah. So can I also have 
your commitment to work on I-15 and I-80 so that we can--again, 
interstate commerce, tourism and trade is particularly 
important?
    Mr. Monje. Yes, ma'am. And it is true in communities across 
the country and bumper to bumper traffic is a sign that the 
economy is coming back but we need to make sure that the 
infrastructure keeps up.
    Senator Rosen. Thank you. I appreciate it. Mr. Chair, my 
time is up.
    Senator Schatz. Thank you, Senator Rosen. Senator Lujan. We 
appear to be experiencing some technical difficulties getting 
Senator Lujan on----
    Senator Lujan. Mr. Chairman, I am with you now, sir. I 
apologize. I was not able to unmute. There we go. Turn the 
camera on.
    Senator Schatz. Go ahead, Senator Lujan.

               STATEMENT OF HON. BEN RAY LUJAN, 
                  U.S. SENATOR FROM NEW MEXICO

    Senator Lujan. Thank you so very much. Honored to be with 
you and thank you so very much for the work that you are doing. 
I wanted to make sure that we jumped into getting a chance to 
visit with our nominees today. And to Mr. Monje, the 
Administrator has proposed a very necessary substantial 
infrastructure bill that hundreds of billions of dollars for 
infrastructure investment, for transportation industries like 
aviation, railroads, transit and seaports--the investments are 
necessary, and I hope that Congress will act on a robust 
infrastructure package this year.
    However, the fastest growing and highest proliferation 
sector in space transportation, America is enjoying a 
revolution in new, more reliable and more affordable launch of 
satellites and people into space. While states and local 
Governments and private industry spending many tens of millions 
on infrastructure every year, yet the Federal Government 
provides no matching funds for local space ports and private 
launch facilities.
    Since you have been serving as Senior Adviser to the 
Secretary, do you know if this reflects a policy decision not 
to allow matching funds?
    Mr. Monje. Sir, would love to work with you on that, and I 
can tell you the folks that work at FAA and Col. Melroy as well 
in her time there, I know they take great pride in the growth 
of the commercial space industry. And I was--it was a beautiful 
day here in D.C. when they launched the SpaceX mission with 
astronauts, with American astronauts for the first time.
    And I know the folks at FAA are very proud of that, of 
their support of that mission, and would look forward to 
working with you to make sure that that we can do our dual 
mission, which is to ensure the safety of those launches, to 
de-conflict them with American air space, and also to promote 
the industry.
    Senator Lujan. Mr. Monje, would you support changing this 
policy to allow matching funds for aerospace infrastructure?
    Mr. Monje. Would love to work with you on that. And I know 
there are many areas of infrastructure where matching funds are 
valuable and would love to work with you and your staff to 
figure that out.
    Senator Lujan. I am not hearing, yes. So I look forward to 
working with you to make this happen. This is important to us 
in the United States and especially with China just landing on 
Mars. You know, we have a choice to do this or not to do this 
if we want to remain competitive. And so I hope the answer will 
be, yes, as we get a chance to move forward. The follow-up 
question is, would you support setting aside enough funds in 
the infrastructure packages to allow matching funds to help 
advance a 21st century transportation mode?
    Mr. Monje. The 21st century? I didn't hear the rest of the 
question, I am sorry,
    Senator Lujan. 21st century transportation mode.
    Mr. Monje. Yes, and, you know, the American Jobs Plan 
creates investments across the entire range of our modes, 
highways, transit, and importantly passenger rail or intermodal 
freight facilities, our waterways and ports. These are critical 
investments and look forward to working with this committee, 
with you to make sure that they get the resources they need.
    Senator Lujan. Appreciate that. And Dr. Spinrad, for states 
like New Mexico, which are sparsely populated, how can NOAA 
expand weather monitoring infrastructure to ensure that data 
developed from those systems accurately reflects surface ground 
weather conditions? Robust weather monitoring infrastructure is 
vitally important in helping develop and deploy emergency 
response systems, alerting transportation systems about 
inclimate weather, and helping farmers and ranchers access risk 
management programs when needing to document the impacts to 
their farms and ranches.
    Mr. Spinrad. Thank you for that question, Senator Lujan. As 
a resident of a remotely populated area of Oregon, I can 
certainly sympathize with the issue that you raised. And I 
think there is a rich history of developing programs for 
surface observations elsewhere in the U.S. I would, if 
confirmed, commit to you to try to develop similar sort of 
capabilities to the extent possible. I would also point out 
that I look forward to working with agencies like NASA for 
development of new remote sensing capabilities that could 
equally apply to the needs that you have described.
    Senator Lujan. Thank you so much. And Mr. Monje, going back 
to you, I recently had the honor of chatting with Secretary 
Buttigieg and Deputy Secretary Trottenberg earlier this year, 
and I raised the importance of ending drunk driving. We are at 
a pivotal moment with technology and policy for industry, and, 
you know, the auto industry is looking for exemptions to 
liability for self-driving cars.
    And I said, look if we are going to do that, we need to 
make sure that we are requiring the development and adoption of 
technology to stop drunk driving and impaired driving. Will you 
commit to work with us to pass the RIDE Act, which will get 
drunk drivers off the road and save as many as 10,000 lives 
each year?
    Mr. Spinrad. Yes, sir. This is, you know, at a time where 
our vehicle, miles traveled decreased. Last year, we saw a 
dramatic spike in the rates of crashes and deaths on a road. 
There are--there is a lot we can do and appreciate your and 
Senator Scott's leadership on that issue.
    Senator Lujan. Thank you very much. And thank the Chair for 
the time today.
    Senator Schatz. Thank you. Senator Lujan. Senator Cruz.

                  STATEMENT OF HON. TED CRUZ, 
                    U.S. SENATOR FROM TEXAS

    Senator Cruz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Congratulations to 
each of the nominees. Col. Melroy and I visited yesterday. 
Thank you for your service to our Nation. As you know, one of 
my biggest priorities is the extension of the life and 
utilization of the International Space Station through at least 
2030. I know that NASA has begun doing the legwork to extend 
the ISS through 2030. Do you agree that the ISS should be 
utilized through at least 2030 provided that it remains safe to 
do so?
    Colonel Melroy. Thank you, Senator Cruz. I really enjoyed 
our conversation, particularly the information about your 
family and your mother, who is a mathematician. Yes, I can say 
that I support the extension of ISS. We have a lot more work to 
do in microgravity science. And as long as it is safe and 
feasible to do so, we will continue to utilize the ISS.
    Senator Cruz. The United States is in a space race with 
both China and Russia. Just last week, Mars--just last week, a 
rover landed on Mars. It is only the third time a Nation has 
successfully landed on Mars behind the United States, and in 
mostly unsuccessful landing by the USSR in 1971. What are your 
thoughts on China's growing power in space, and does it concern 
you? Do you think the guardrails of the Wolf amendment are 
adequate to protect U.S. space technology and our global 
competitive advantage in space and space exploration?
    Colonel Melroy. Senator Cruz, you are right to be 
concerned. It is not just the landing on Mars, which is very 
impressive, but also a couple of landings on the Moon and, of 
course, the new construction starting of a low Earth orbit 
space station. China has made their goals very clear to take 
away space superiority from the United States. So we are right 
to be concerned.
    When you add the other concerns of intellectual property 
theft and aggressive behavior in space, I think it is--I 
support the Wolf amendment, as it is called. It is the law. 
NASA will continue to follow the law. It is there to ensure 
that the U.S. thinks very carefully about any kind of 
engagement with China. However, we have to operate together in 
the space domain. So there are times when it is in the best 
interests of the United States to talk to China.
    Senator Cruz. What would the ramifications be if Russia 
were to pull out of the ISS and go their own way in low Earth 
orbit or partner with the Chinese?
    Colonel Melroy. Senator, it is--it would be a serious 
outcome for the optimum safe operations of the International 
Space Station. It was designed from the beginning with the 
assumption that there would be Russian and American crew 
members present. The current cooperation, in fact, on the space 
station with Russia is a shining light, actually, both in the 
relationship, but also in the indications of soft power that 
NASA can provide. I think NASA is already talking about a 
follow on eventually to the space station. At some point it 
will wear out. I don't think it is unreasonable that Russia is 
talking about it also. If I am confirmed, I look forward to 
actually having a conversation with Ruscosmos and find out what 
they really think because we need to be harmonizing timing.
    Senator Cruz. About 2 weeks ago, we saw the uncontrolled 
reentry of part of China's long March rocket, the second time 
that has happened in a year. Thankfully, this time debris 
landed in the ocean, but it easily could have ended up in a 
populated area, killing hundreds or even thousands. How can 
NASA and our international partners get China to have less of a 
launch first and ask questions later approach and start 
behaving responsibly in space?
    Colonel Melroy. That is a good question, Senator. I think 
it is very important for the U.S. to partner with our allies to 
develop norms of behavior. I will give you an example. NASA 
developed the orbital debris standard mitigation practices, 
which have been proliferated throughout the world in law and 
policy. Good technical norms and safety norms should 
proliferate. We also need to call China out, as Administrator 
Nelson did, when they violate those norms.
    Senator Cruz. And finally, what are your opinions on 
leveraging private companies in commercial space to achieve 
NASA's goals and our Nation's goals in space?
    Colonel Melroy. Senator Cruz, it was really extraordinary 
to watch NASA inject so much energy into our wonderful 
industrial base and aerospace industry, kick start a whole new 
generation of commercial space capabilities with the commercial 
cargo resupply services program, over a decade ago began that 
investment. It is absolutely essential that we continue to 
invest in and support commercial space. It has brought a whole 
new price point of capabilities to the U.S. Government in the 
commercial market and allows NASA to focus on solving the 
hardest problems.
    Senator Cruz. Thank you.
    Senator Schatz. Senator Klobuchar,

               STATEMENT OF HON. AMY KLOBUCHAR, 
                  U.S. SENATOR FROM MINNESOTA

    Senator Klobuchar. Thank you very much and congratulations 
to all the nominees. I am going to start with some kind of 
little different questions here. I will start with you, Col. 
Melroy. More than 150,000 people with cancer seek help at my 
hometown Mayo Clinic each year. And recently, Mayo researchers 
actually, maybe you are aware of this, have been working with 
NASA engineers, computer scientists, and software developers in 
order to develop an algorithm to predict how cancer spreads. 
Can you speak to the role that the public, private partnerships 
play in spurring scientific breakthroughs, particularly for 
health care?
    Colonel Melroy. Thank you, Senator Klobuchar. I think 
public, private partnerships come in many shapes and sizes, and 
health care is ripe for those types of investments. And NASA 
has the unique capabilities of the International Space Station 
and a very robust life sciences community to support that.
    Senator Klobuchar. Very good. Sort of along the same lines, 
Dr. Spinrad, the Great Lakes Restoration Initiative, Lake 
Superior is pretty important in my state, is a program by the 
EPA and has contributed greatly to the restoration of the Great 
Lakes. As one of 13 Federal agencies collaborating with the 
EPA, NOAA has been allocated over $178 million to help 
accomplish restoration goals using science data products and 
services.
    In your testimony, you note that you strongly believe that 
public, private partnerships are an essential part of economic 
development. Can you speak to how you would improve this 
initiative or the role that public private partnerships could 
play in benefiting the Great Lakes region?
    Mr. Spinrad. Thank you, Senator. In short, I think the 
dialog between the public sector and the private sector could 
be dramatically enhanced with regard to where should the 
provision of products and services start and who are the 
components that have key requirements. If you look at what has 
happened in the public, private sector in the development of 
commercial weather products, for example, there are some 
wonderful lessons learned there that I could--that I think 
could be applied to a broader dissemination of products and 
actually the expansion, the economic development of new 
economic sectors around products. Earlier, we were talking with 
Senator Peters about the harmful algal bloom issues in the 
Great Lakes.
    And there is an example where I think tailored products 
could be developed by the private sector for particular 
communities predicated on the provision of fundamental weather 
and Great Lakes products through an agency like the National 
Weather Service.
    So if confirmed, I am committed to ensuring that we take an 
aggressive approach, as Secretary Raimondo has expressed, 
toward identifying where are the opportunities for new products 
and services, and what are the roles and responsibilities 
respectively for the public and the private sector.
    Senator Klobuchar. Very good. I just want you to keep your 
eye on the Great Lakes. When I first got on this committee, I 
got assigned to the to the Ocean subcommittee, which I thought 
was just about oceans. And I got there, and I saw all these 
mostly East, and all East and West coast senators except for 
me. And I remember I wrote a note, Senator Schatz, to Senator 
Lautenberg, who is then the senator from New Jersey.
    And I said, I am the only senator on this subcommittee that 
doesn't have an ocean. And he wrote back, next year just come 
back and ask for one. There you go. So the Great Lakes is 
really, really important and it is part of your jurisdiction. 
OK, Mr. Monje, congratulations on your nomination.
    And what are your plans to ensure that rural communities 
have access to critical transportation infrastructure grant 
funding? I am here talking about the RAISE, formerly the bill 
grants and the capital investment grants.
    Mr. Monje. Yes, ma'am. As this Congress has directed us to 
do with both the INFRA and the RAISE programs to have rural 
minimums, I was mentioning earlier that it is a point of pride 
of our team, of the career staff that work for the 
Undersecretary, to do outreach, to do technical assistance to 
applicants, to make sure that they can take the projects and 
were just on the cusp of being awarded last time and bring them 
up to snuff and to be able to compete.
    And that is true for the capital investment grant program 
as well. I know the FTA team spends a lot of time and there are 
a number of programs that can help rural communities. And in my 
previous time in the Administration, I was able to travel 
around the country, I didn't make it to Minnesota, but I would 
like to go----
    Senator Klobuchar. Oh, you are going to have to go.
    Mr. Monje. Yes, ma'am.
    Senator Klobuchar. OK, so here is some other things related 
to that. Amtrak, our longest rail line to go from Chicago to 
the West Coast, provide a vital link stopping in Minnesota. 
Last month, I sent a letter to Secretary Buttigieg to include 
funding for passenger rail lines across Minnesota, including 
the Twin Cities, Milwaukee, Chicago and inner-city passenger 
rail, that is what I am referring to, as well as a new project. 
We are looking at the Northern Lights Express up to Duluth. Can 
you speak to the economic importance of these routes and 
potential routes?
    Mr. Monje. Yes, ma'am. And I understand the Empire Builders 
is the most scenic of the of the Amtrak routes. As you know, 
the American Jobs Plan invests $80 billion in passenger rail. 
And I think the Midwest is, like other parts of the country, is 
uniquely well situated to get some of these city pairs and 
something that was important to Secretary Buttigieg, you know, 
trying to get reliable, good service between South Bend and 
Chicago. And look forward to working with you to expand passage 
rail.
    Senator Klobuchar. Thanks. Two other issues that I care a 
lot about. Port infrastructure, I understand you talked about 
that. We have, of course, a major port in Duluth. I was just 
there a few weeks ago. And we have to do more work, of course, 
on the shipping lanes and blocks and dams and the like. Can you 
speak to how investments in multimodal port infrastructure are 
important to reduce delays in construction and keep us 
competitive as we work on the Endless Frontiers Bill? Right 
now, a lot of our competitiveness will be dictated by how well 
we can get goods to market.
    Mr. Monje. It is critically important, and we need to do 
everything we can to get goods off the ships, on the trains, on 
the trucks, and get them to where they are going. It is the 
lifeblood of the economy. The Administration proposed $17 
billion as part of the American Jobs Plan for intermodal 
facilities, for intercoastal waterways, and for ports. And it 
is a critical part of our supply chain.
    Senator Klobuchar. I have led the recreational trails bills 
for many years. And just for your knowledge, for when you visit 
our state, not only do we have huge use of bike trails and 
other things, but we also are the manufacturers of domestic 
snowmobiles and ATVs with both Arctic Cat and Polaris 
headquartered in Minnesota. And interestingly enough, the 
groups, the bike trails, the cross-country skiers, and the ATVs 
and the snowmobile users, you wouldn't really put all this 
together, have come together in support of the Recreational 
Trails Program because there are different trails for different 
uses. And that has been very helpful in moving this through. 
And do you agree that good infrastructure projects with trails 
can boost property values, attract new businesses and the like?
    Mr. Monje. Yes, ma'am.
    Senator Klobuchar. OK, very good. I think let me see if I 
have any other things having--this is good. One last thing, Dr. 
Spinrad, diversity in STEM. I talked about this over the phone 
with several of the nominees. And way back, the last 
Administration at the very beginning actually led a bill on 
this with NASA and then in general with science that were 
signed into law. And I think we need to do more there. Could 
you just quickly address that for women and people of color?
    Mr. Spinrad. Yes, Senator. Yay, verily, amen. I am firmly 
committed to ensuring aggressive approaches to diversity, 
equity, justice, and inclusion. I would cite as evidence the 
roles that I have played in various leadership positions to 
invoke exactly those kinds of thinking, thoughts. And if 
confirmed, you have got my commitment to address that 
aggressively. Thank you.
    Senator Klobuchar. Very good. Thank you.
    Senator Schatz. Thank you, Senator Klobuchar. Before we 
close today's hearing, I have one more question which we ask of 
all nominees. Dr. Spinrad, Col. Melroy, Mr. Monje, if 
confirmed, will you pledge to work collaboratively with this 
committee, provide thorough and timely responses to our 
requests for information as we put together and address 
important policy issues, and appear before the Committee when 
requested?
    Mr. Spinrad. Yes, Chairman.
    Colonel Melroy. Yes, Chair.
    Mr. Monje. Yes, sir.
    Senator Schatz. Thank you for that commitment. Senators 
will have 48 hours to submit questions for the record to the 
Committee. Witnesses will have one week to respond to those 
questions. Thank you. This concludes today's hearing.
    [Whereupon, at 11:50 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

                            A P P E N D I X

   Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Maria Cantwell to 
                       Richard W. Spinrad, Ph.D.
    Aquaculture. In the United States, coastal shellfish farmers are an 
important component of local communities, particularly in Washington 
state. While aquaculture has substantial potential in the United 
States, examples of massive escapements like the 2017 pen collapse in 
Puget Sound, mean that its expansion requires thoughtful scientific 
studies and planning before finfish aquaculture is considered in 
Federal waters. In addition, the roles of stakeholders must be 
clarified. Just this week, the Regional Fisheries Management Councils' 
Coordinating Committee drafted a statement noting that the councils 
should have a clearly defined role in the siting, permitting, and 
review of aquaculture operations in Federal waters. In addition, 
numerous coastal communities and environmental organizations are 
advocating for a transparent process that is based in the best 
available science before any aquaculture operations commence in Federal 
waters.
    During your testimony before the Committee, you touted your 
endorsement by the National Aquaculture Association, but did not 
mention the fisheries management councils, coastal communities or 
conservation groups' role in the development of aquaculture. You also 
mentioned the need for standards for offshore aquaculture operations 
and noted previously introduced legislation, which experts find 
inadequate in that regard.

    Question 1. During the Trump Administration, NOAA began to 
implement an Executive Order on Seafood Competitiveness as well as to 
identify two Aquaculture Opportunity Areas (AOAs). How will you 
personally review this process and determine if this is in accordance 
with the priorities of the Biden Administration and based on the best 
available science?
    Answer. Aquaculture holds promise to increase the Nation's seafood 
supply at a time when pressure on wild stocks is at a maximum. 
Nonetheless, aquaculture has a number of potential risks--including 
escapement, water quality, safety of navigation, and habitat impacts--
that must be identified, addressed, and managed using the best 
available science. In addition, aquaculture development strategies 
should not be based on a ``one size fits all'' approach, but rather, 
tailored to account for regional, state and local considerations.
    If confirmed, I would work to better understand the views of 
Congress and local communities by engaging tribes, regional fishery 
management councils, state fishery managers, environmental 
organizations, aquaculture industry representatives, and others to 
understand the needs of their stakeholders to determine whether, where, 
and what types of aquaculture might make the most sense.

    Question 2. Do you support the Advancing the Quality and 
Understanding of American Aquaculture Act? If so, why and if not, why 
not?
    Answer. If confirmed, I would welcome the opportunity to learn more 
about this legislation and to work with you to evaluate sustainable 
aquaculture development, the needs of particular communities, and 
strong conservation standards.

    Question 3. Do you believe that robust scientific studies are 
needed in advance of a new permitting regime for offshore finfish 
aquaculture?
    Answer. Permitting regimes for aquaculture should be based on the 
best available peer-reviewed scientific information that takes into 
consideration appropriate siting, species characteristics, and 
potential impacts.

    Question 4. If confirmed, what assurances can you provide that you 
will prevent large scale finfish aquaculture development that would 
pose a high risk of ecological degradation? How would you plan to 
accomplish this?
    Answer. If confirmed, I will work within the agency to understand 
the risks of large-scale finfish aquaculture, while also understanding 
the concerns of communities and stakeholders. The only way to advance 
aquaculture in the United States is to do so responsibly, using the 
best peer-reviewed science.

    Fisheries and Ecosystem Science. Fishing is one of the most 
climate-impacted industries in the United States. As oceans warm, our 
fisheries and the ecosystems they depend on are experiencing massive 
changes--in productivity and location. NOAA struggles to keep up with 
fisheries and protected species stock assessments as is. The fishing 
industry needs more tools from NOAA so that they can plan, adapt and 
build resilient operations in our changing climate.

    Question 5. What steps will you take to prioritize the 
modernization of NOAA's science and invest in the necessary research to 
understand ecosystem shifts for commercially managed species, as well 
as protected species using biological and oceanographic observations 
and regional-scale climate models?
    Answer. Changing climate and oceans are having significant impacts 
on the Nation's valuable marine ecosystems and the communities and 
economies that depend upon them. As a science and stewardship agency, 
NOAA is well positioned to expand and diversify its climate-related 
science and services to help communities address these challenges. If 
confirmed, I will advocate for the resources necessary to increase the 
agency's science and management tools, and to prepare for and respond 
to these rapidly changing environmental conditions with the products 
and services needed.

    Question 6. NOAA must expand stock assessment surveys to meet 
emerging climate science needs, as well as traditional fisheries 
management which has been under-resourced. Despite consistent requests 
from the congress, NOAA has not communicated stock assessment survey 
needs. Will you work with the Congress to identify stock assessment 
survey needs in terms of both physical survey needs as well as 
budgetary requirements?
    Answer. Scientific research surveys underpin NOAA's management of 
U.S. fisheries and protected resources. The impacts of climate change 
on managed fish stocks and protected species will require NOAA to 
continuously track and account for shifting species distributions to 
ensure the continued accuracy of stock assessments. If confirmed, I 
will work with you to address the long-term fiscal and physical 
challenges of fielding fisheries and protected species surveys.

    Tribal Consultation and Engagement. NOAA must do more to support 
Tribes and Tribal fishers. I am concerned about the previous 
administration's ``check the box'' posture to government to government 
consultation.

    Question 7. Please list and describe specific areas for improvement 
in NOAA's consultation with Tribes and fulfillment of Federal treaty 
responsibilities.
    Answer. Consulting tribes and incorporating their traditional 
ecological knowledge (TEK) is an essential part of NOAA's resource 
management responsibilities and ensures better resource stewardship. 
Furthermore, government-to-government consultation with Federally-
recognized Tribes is a critical aspect of the sound and productive 
relationship between the United States and sovereign Indian Tribal 
governments.
    If confirmed, I would assess whether we have the adequate level and 
prominence of staffing to engage with Tribes and address their 
interests in fisheries and other resource management issues. I would 
engage Tribes in a thorough review of our current practices to ensure 
that NOAA is engaging with Tribes and incorporating TEK into its 
management decisions in a meaningful way. I place a high value on 
providing pertinent scientific information to tribal entities and to 
learning what additional science and services NOAA can provide to 
assist Tribal communities. I welcome your long-standing expertise on 
this issue moving forward.

    Question 8. Government to government consultation should extend 
beyond regulatory matters. Tribes should be consulted and engaged on 
policy, conservation and other matters that impact Treaty Resources 
both directly and indirectly. How can NOAA improve relationships and 
meaningful engagement with Tribes? If confirmed, what specific steps 
will you take to ensure that Tribal engagement and consultation is a 
priority for NOAA fisheries, and throughout the agency?
    Answer. I agree that government to government consultation with 
Tribes should extend more broadly to include NOAA's conservation 
initiatives and strategies beyond those that are regulatory in nature. 
NOAA's management of resources and provision of science and services 
benefit from incorporating traditional ecological knowledge from 
Tribes. If confirmed, I will work across the agency to ensure 
meaningful, active, and ongoing engagement and consultation with Tribal 
partners.

    Question 9. Chairman Billy Frank Jr. once told me that ``half of 
zero is zero.'' That means, as salmon populations become endangered, 
and even disappear, so does a Tribe's ability to access their Treaty 
Right. Treaty Rights At Risk is an initiative aimed at restoring salmon 
and protecting Treaty Rights. What more can NOAA do to engage with 
Tribes on salmon restoration, specifically? Will you work with us to 
ensure that NOAA participates and responds to the Treaty Rights At Risk 
Initiative?
    Answer. Tribal communities play an important role in the recovery 
and restoration of salmon, and I look forward to learning more about 
the Treaty Rights At Risk Initiative. If confirmed, I commit to working 
with you and Tribal communities on ways NOAA can engage more 
meaningfully in salmon restoration and recovery in the Pacific.

Salmon.

    Question 10. How will you bring a whole of NOAA approach to Pacific 
salmon recovery to leverage the scientific expertise of the whole 
agency to address these critical science and recovery needs?
    Answer. Pacific salmon are critically important for our culture, 
recreation, and economy. If confirmed, I look forward to learning more 
about NOAA's research for the recovery of Pacific salmon and their 
habitat, and other management efforts that are taking place across the 
agency.

    Question 11. NOAA must be a stronger leader on Pacific salmon 
recovery and management. If confirmed, how do you propose NOAA work 
across the Federal family to better leverage resources to address 
habitat, research and other salmon recovery needs?
    Answer. Partnerships among Federal, state, local, and Tribal 
entities, together with non-governmental and private organizations, are 
key to restoring healthy salmon runs and securing the economic and 
cultural benefits they provide for future generations. If confirmed, I 
commit to building on my strong record of inter-agency collaboration, 
working with key partners to conduct adequate research, monitoring, and 
analyses needed to ensure Pacific salmon recovery and sustainability. I 
look forward to learning more about the work that is currently underway 
at NOAA and to working with you on this issue.

    Fisheries Disasters. Washington state fishermen and Tribal 
communities are just starting to see some of the $90M of the Covid-19 
related fisheries disaster funds. In addition, there are 10 pending 
fishery disaster determinations for Washington state salmon fisheries. 
Some requests, such as the Washington Puget Sound Coho Salmon Fishery, 
have been pending for almost two years.
    Senator Wicker and I have reintroduced our bipartisan bill to 
reform the fishery disaster process, including adding deadlines to 
ensure that fishery disasters are evaluated and declared in a 
reasonable timeframe. While our bill makes improvements, NOAA needs to 
do more to speed up the disaster process, and modernize how funds are 
used help communities adapt to a changing climate and shifting stocks.

    Question 12. What more can NOAA do to modernize the fishery 
disaster process? How could these programs be used to help communities 
adapt to climate change?
    Answer. I appreciate your concern that fishery disaster 
determinations be made more expeditiously, including fishery disaster 
funds for Washington fisheries. I recognize the economic importance of 
these fisheries to Washington's coastal and Tribal communities, as well 
as the subsistence, cultural, and ceremonial value of these fisheries 
to the local Tribes. If confirmed, I look forward to learning more 
about NOAA's fishery disaster program, how it can assist community 
adaptation efforts, and implementing any changes needed to improve the 
process.

    Weather Infrastructure. With the increase in intensity and 
frequency of severe weather events, millions of lives rely on NOAA's 
weather predictions and forecasts more than ever before. In the last 
five years the Pacific Northwesterners have experienced a ``new'' 
weather event--``smoke storms''--where catastrophic fires from hundreds 
of miles away drove people inside their homes for days to retreat from 
the smoke.

    Question 13. Will you work to expand NOAA's social science program 
to improve communicating warnings and watches to the American public, 
particularly those underserved communities that NOAA may not have 
traditionally worked with? Please describe.
    Answer. Social science has become increasingly important in the 
manner in which NOAA listens to public concerns, communicates forecasts 
and uncertainty to ensure people understand environmental threats and 
takes the appropriate actions to reduce risks to life and property. If 
confirmed, I look forward to working with you on expanding NOAA's 
social science capacity and its application to advise communities 
effectively in the wake of extreme weather events. I am particularly 
interested in exploring and implementing ways NOAA can better serve the 
needs of traditionally underserved communities.

    Question 14. Please describe how you see NOAA's role in national 
efforts to address wildfire hazards. What potential is there for NOAA 
to expand and improve its fire weather mission, and what would it 
require to do so?
    Answer. It is my understanding that NOAA plays a vital role in 
supporting federal, state, local, territorial, and Tribal partners in 
battling wildfires, while also addressing fire community needs before, 
during, and after wildfires. NOAA's involvement ranges from detailed 
weather and environmental modeling and forecasting; to research, 
observations, and detection; to historical analyses of past fire 
seasons based on archived NOAA data. If confirmed, I look forward to 
working with you on improving NOAA's fire weather capabilities.
                                 ______
                                 
     Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Jon Tester to 
                       Richard W. Spinrad, Ph.D.
    Space Situational Awareness and Low Earth Orbit Congestion. There 
are currently around 6,000 satellites circling the globe (2,500 
active). The number of satellites in Low Earth Orbit (LEO) is expected 
to grow exponentially in the coming years as companies like SpaceX and 
Amazon launch thousands of satellites to beam broadband Internet to the 
earth. LEO broadband satellite constellations will bring fast and 
reliable Internet to unserved rural customers, including in Montana.
    The U.S. Innovation and Competition Act (formerly the Endless 
Frontier Act) incorporates the SPACE Act, which provides NOAA's Office 
of Space Commerce with the authority and funding to perform space 
situational awareness activities.

    Question 1. What is your vision for ensuring that American 
companies will continue to have safe access to low earth orbit, given 
the expected exponential growth in cube satellites and satellite 
constellations?
    Answer. I believe that NOAA and the Office of Space Commerce (OSC) 
play a key role in working with the commercial space industry to foster 
American leadership in space. If confirmed, I look forward to learning 
more about the Office of Space Commerce and to working with Congress to 
ensure that it is properly prioritized and resourced to continue 
serving this important function.

    Question 2. How will NOAA encourage information sharing so that 
commercial space operators, and the government, can avoid conjunctions 
that would damage property, risk life, and increase ``space junk'' and 
debris?
    Answer. It is my understanding that NOAA works with partners, 
including NASA, DoD, and private industry, to share information on 
satellite operations and monitor for potential hazards. If confirmed, I 
look forward to working with you, commercial space operators, and 
interagency partners on this important issue.
                                 ______
                                 
     Response to Written Question Submitted by Hon. Jacky Rosen to 
                       Richard W. Spinrad, Ph.D.
    Regional Climate Center program. First authorized in 1978, NOAA's 
Regional Climate Centers (RCCs) were created to develop products and 
services for sector specific, climate-related problems. The program is 
divided into six regional centers, with the Western RCC housed at the 
Desert Research Institute in Nevada. The Western RCC addresses a range 
of climate needs and issues specific to its region and beyond, 
including drought monitoring, weather and climate extremes, and 
wildfire and smoke impacts.

    Question. Dr. Spinrad, given the increasing activities of the RCCs 
and the need for immediate action on climate change, will you commit to 
further investing in and support Regional Climate Centers? How can 
Congress better support RCCs, including through the FY22 appropriations 
process?
    Answer. If confirmed, I will commit to ensuring that NOAA is 
effectively delivering climate science and services to communities, 
using existing critical programs, such as the Regional Climate Centers 
(RCCs), as well as evaluating the need for new areas of climate 
research and tools. It is my understanding that the Regional Climate 
Centers play a crucial role in helping communities understand the 
unique climate issues and sensitivities of their regions. RCCs provide 
value-added products, deliver climate services, support operational 
climate services efforts across NOAA and other agencies, and integrate 
non-NOAA and NOAA data. If confirmed, I look forward to working with 
you through the President's budget process to support the RCCs.
                                 ______
                                 
    Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Roger Wicker to 
                       Richard W. Spinrad, Ph.D.
Recreational Fishing Management
    Question 1. I introduced and passed the bipartisan Modern Fish Act 
to improve the management of recreational fisheries by incorporating 
the best available science. In the Gulf of Mexico, states like 
Mississippi have invested significant time and money to develop a more 
accurate understanding of how much fish recreational fishermen harvest. 
Despite this effort, NOAA has proposed ignoring the higher quality 
state data, and treating the less accurate Federal data from the Marine 
Recreational Information Program as though it is of equal quality. If 
this occurred, it would have unfairly decreased Mississippi's share of 
the Red Snapper fishery by 60 percent in 2021. In addition, the recent 
``Great Red Snapper Count'' suggests that the actual abundance of red 
snapper in the Gulf is three times higher than what NOAA had estimated.

   In April, the Gulf of Mexico Fisheries Management Council 
        recognized the high quality of Mississippi's state red snapper 
        survey and voted to delay the calibration of state survey data 
        to the incomplete and low-quality Federal survey data so that 
        they can continue further study. Will you commit to working 
        with me to support the Council's actions with regard to red 
        snapper?

    Answer. If confirmed, I look forward to learning more about the red 
snapper fishery, which I know is of great economic and cultural 
significance to the state of Mississippi and the entire Gulf of Mexico 
region. As I noted in my testimony before the Commerce Committee, it is 
critical that NOAA base management decisions--whether for fisheries 
management or weather forecasting--on the best peer reviewed scientific 
information available. I will commit to working with you and your staff 
to learn more about this fishery and its underlying science.
Uncrewed Maritime Systems
    Question 2. The University of Southern Mississippi is a leader in 
the use of uncrewed maritime systems. Uncrewed maritime systems are a 
highly cost-effective way for NOAA to increase the number of 
observations it collects.

   Will you work with me to increase NOAA's use of uncrewed 
        maritime systems?

   How would you work to promote these and other innovative 
        technologies at NOAA and across the Department of Commerce?

    Answer. If confirmed, I will work with you and your office to 
increase NOAA's use of uncrewed maritime systems to help NOAA and its 
partners better understand the full earth system, and I look forward to 
promoting NOAA's exploration and use of uncrewed systems to carry out 
NOAA's diverse mission from weather forecasting to fisheries 
management.
    As I noted in my testimony, I believe uncrewed systems hold great 
promise for data collection and in some cases can supplement existing 
methods efficiently and effectively. If confirmed, I would build upon 
NOAA's progress in this area by evaluating the broad and complex data 
needs across the agency and working internally and with external 
stakeholders to utilize uncrewed systems research, development, and 
operations where it makes most sense.
Regional Ocean Partnerships
    Question 3. Regional Ocean Partnerships are made up of coastal 
states and promote the effective stewardship of our oceans and coasts 
by giving those states a strong voice. Last Congress, Senator Cantwell 
and I introduced the Regional Ocean Partnership Act to codify the 
existing regional ocean partnerships.

   Do you commit to working with me to ensure the states have a 
        strong voice in the stewardship of their oceans and coasts?

   What do you see as the benefits of these types of 
        partnerships for taking care of our marine resources and 
        promoting the blue economy?

    Answer. I recognize the need for states, local jurisdictions, and 
tribal governments to have a strong voice in the shared stewardship of 
our Nation's coasts and oceans. NOAA coordinates closely on the 
management, resilience, and restoration of ocean and coastal areas 
through collaborative regional efforts led by Regional Ocean 
Partnerships. These partnerships have enabled states to successfully 
guide and manage appropriate development and conservation within our 
coastal and marine resources. If confirmed, I will ensure that NOAA 
strengthens our critical partnerships with states, local jurisdictions, 
and tribal governments to address coastal and marine issues across our 
shared ocean resources.
    Dr. Spinrad, if confirmed to be Undersecretary of Commerce for 
Oceans and Atmosphere, you will oversee an agency (NOAA) that enforces 
our Nation's marine fisheries laws. This includes continuing efforts to 
combat illegal, unreported, and unregulated (IUU) fishing. IUU fishing 
not only has devastating impacts on valuable marine fisheries, but is 
also tied to various human rights abuses such as forced labor and human 
trafficking. However, effectively combating IUU fishing is a difficult 
task for an agency with limited resources considering the vast ocean 
areas in which the illicit activity occurs.

    Question 4. Dr. Spinrad, if confirmed as NOAA Administrator, what 
actions would you take to better prevent or deter IUU fishing in remote 
marine areas? Could NOAA leverage innovative commercial technologies, 
such as remote sensing and satellite radio frequency detection, to 
expand its enforcement reach and capabilities?
    Answer. I agree that this is a critical issue, from the human 
rights, marine resources management, international trade, and economic 
fairness standpoints. If confirmed, I commit to using all the tools at 
my disposal--including uncrewed systems, remote sensors, and other 
innovative technologies to combat illegal, unreported, and unregulated 
fishing and the human rights abuses it perpetuates.

    Question 5. In Oregon, the timber community and a group of 
environmental and conservation groups have come to an historic 
agreement to modernize Oregon forest practices called the Private 
Forest Accord. The first part of the agreement was Oregon state 
legislation passed in 2020, which resulted in enhanced protections for 
streams. The parties are now in extensive negotiations and engaging in 
a collaborative and science-based effort to identify potential changes 
to Oregon's forest practice laws that could be included in a state-wide 
Habitat Conservation Plan. Such plans can create win-win situations by 
promoting long-term conservation benefits and creating economic growth. 
Can you commit to NOAA engagement and participation in the Private 
Forest Accord process as the parties negotiate? And can you commit to 
working with me to find other areas where we can promote conservation, 
while enhancing our economy?
    Answer. If confirmed, I would work to promote NOAA's active 
engagement and environmental stewardship responsibility while also 
working to advance the Nation's economic viability and security. As a 
native Oregonian, I would welcome the opportunity to engage and learn 
more about this particular collaboration as well as possible 
collaboration in other areas.
                                 ______
                                 
    Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Dan Sullivan to 
                       Richard W. Spinrad, Ph.D.
Surveys
    Given your experience, I'm sure you understand how critical 
fisheries surveys are for reducing uncertainty in stock assessments and 
facilitating sustainable harvest rates. Unfortunately, the NOAA Federal 
fisheries surveys program faced a severe and consequential setback in 
2020, when NOAA leadership cancelled many fisheries surveys due to 
operational challenges created by the pandemic. Outgoing NOAA 
leadership developed a plan for resuming surveys in 2021, but it will 
fall on you to ensure that NOAA resumes these surveys. My understanding 
is that NOAA is currently planning for a full complement of surveys in 
the upcoming season, however my concerns go far beyond the current 
year. It is critical that NOAA maintain or increase surveys into the 
future.

    Question 1. Can you commit to ensuring NOAA is fully accountable 
for both the 2021 surveys and for maintaining fisheries surveys into 
the future?
    Answer. I understand the importance of conducting regular fisheries 
surveys in Alaska and around the country to ensure that NOAA has the 
best data available to set fishing quotas that maximize fishing 
opportunity, while maintaining sustainability of fish stocks. If 
confirmed, I am committed to advocating for resources needed to 
continue required fishery surveys into the future.
    Secondly, I know there is interest regarding unmanned systems and 
new technology to get fisheries data. While I certainly appreciate 
attempts to use other tools and approaches to collect data and support 
stock assessments, I do not want to see these efforts diminish our 
current at-sea efforts as a replacement without proper testing and 
coordination with traditional surveys to ensure scientific integrity is 
maintained.

    Question 2. As NOAA works to develop these tools and technologies, 
can you commit to me that funds will not be diverted away from at-sea 
survey funding while you explore the implementation of these tools?
    Answer. In some cases, uncrewed maritime systems can be deployed to 
collect ocean, coastal, and atmospheric data at a similar caliber as 
data from crewed survey platforms. In such cases, using these systems 
may present a cost-effective opportunity to expand, supplement, or 
enhance the data collection capabilities to meet NOAA's mission. 
However, these systems do not make sense in every case and, if 
confirmed, I will ensure such systems are appropriately deployed.
NOAA/NMFS personnel in Alaska
    I understand there has been an assessment of NOAA's facilities 
footprint in the Northwest region and Alaska reviewing the agencies 
presence. Currently, there are a large (approx. 261) number of Alaska 
focused personnel located in Washington State that would more 
appropriately be based in Alaska. The Ted Stevens Marine Research 
Institute in Juneau has plenty of vacant space. There are 100 NOAA 
vacancies in Alaska. Previously, Secretary Ross committed to ``working 
expeditiously'' to fill these roles by using relocation and retention 
tools.
    Additionally, science sometimes happens in a vacuum. In Alaska 
however, a systemic or interdisciplinary approach in solving critical 
issues in fishery management is imperative. The science needs to happen 
in the place--taking Alaskan science outside of Alaska creates a 
disconnect that is not acceptable.

    Question 3. Can you commit to maintain (or increase) personnel 
located in Alaska's coastal communities?
    Answer. If confirmed, I look forward to working with you on this 
issue. Alaska is the state with the longest coastline and highest 
volume commercial fisheries in the U.S., and I understand the 
importance of ensuring a robust NOAA presence in the state of Alaska.

    Question 4. Can you commit to working with the Alaska delegation if 
any discussions or efforts are taken?
    Answer. If confirmed, I will ensure that NOAA maintains an open and 
active dialogue with the Alaska delegation on relevant workforce and 
facilities issues.
Partnership Programs at NOAA
    In Alaska, NOAA's investment in partnership programs such as the 
Alaska Ocean Observing System (the Integrated Ocean Observing System 
program), Sea Grant, and others have helped increase marine safety with 
infrastructure such as radars, wave buoys and co-located AIS and 
weather stations, provided lower-cost water level observations to 
remote areas, detected and helped understand the impact of ocean 
acidification on state fisheries and aquaculture, and coordinated 
sampling of harmful algal blooms, a major concern of subsistence users 
and aquaculture farms in Alaska.

    Question 5. How do you see NOAA's investment in these partnership 
programs growing?
    Answer. Thank you for recognizing the importance of partnership 
programs like the U.S. Integrated Ocean Observing System and the 
National Sea Grant College Program. Marine navigation safety is 
critical for Alaska and across the U.S., and I agree that we need to 
continue investing in NOAA's marine navigation infrastructure, data, 
and services. If confirmed, I will work with you and the Committee to 
ensure that these partnership programs continue to be a priority.

    Question 6. How do these programs help other efforts at NOAA?
    Answer. The U.S. Integrated Ocean Observing System provides 
essential tools and forecasts to improve marine navigation safety, 
promote the economy, strengthen food security, and protect our 
environment. Integrated ocean information is available in near real 
time. Promoting easier access to this information improves our ability 
to understand and predict coastal events, such as storms and sea level 
rise. If confirmed, I will work with you and the Committee to ensure 
that these partnership programs continue to be a priority.
                                 ______
                                 
     Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Rick Scott to 
                       Richard W. Spinrad, Ph.D.
    Question 1. NOAA designated areas off southern California and in 
the Gulf of Mexico as Aquaculture Opportunity Areas in response to 
former President Trump's Executive Order on Promoting American Seafood 
Competitiveness and Economic Growth. This is a big industry in my 
state, with so many families dependent on its success, and it is 
important for the U.S. to continue efforts to build a resilient, 
domestic food supply chain through aquaculture and fisheries 
management.

   Could you detail your plans to strengthen and bolster 
        domestic fisheries and aquaculture?

    Answer. Aquaculture holds promise to increase the Nation's seafood 
supply at a time when pressure on wild fish stocks is at a maximum. 
Aquaculture development strategies should be specific to species, and 
tailored to account for regional, state, tribal, and local 
considerations.
    If confirmed, I would work to understand better the views of 
Congress and local communities by engaging regional fishery management 
councils, state fishery managers, aquaculture industry representatives, 
tribes, fishermen, environmental organizations, and others to determine 
whether, where, and what types of aquaculture might make the most 
sense.

    Question 2. During my time as Governor of Florida, we experienced 
several hard-hitting hurricanes that devastated communities. We know 
first-hand that preparedness saves lives, and NOAA's work to develop 
and improve weather predictive services has been critical to our 
preparedness efforts.

   How do you plan to improve NOAA's weather forecasting 
        services, so that families can have the best information to 
        stay safe?

    Answer. I understand and appreciate the challenges of living in a 
region of the country that experiences regular extreme weather, such as 
hurricanes. NOAA's predictive, warning, and outreach capabilities are 
central to its mission to protect lives and property from the 
devastating effects of hurricanes, tornadoes, fire weather, and other 
types of extreme weather.
    If confirmed, I would promote advancements to NOAA's observational 
infrastructure, improve weather models internally and by engaging 
private sector expertise, and increase NOAA's computational capacity. I 
would also focus on the workforce needs to ensure the forecasts are 
timely and effectively disseminated. Each of these efforts would help 
NOAA better predict hurricane track and intensity, improving the 
quality and utility of weather advisories and warnings.
    In addition, I would identify ways to improve NOAA outreach to 
ensure communities get weather warnings in an understandable and 
actionable manner and with enough advanced warning to allow them to 
make sound decisions about their personal safety.

    Question 3. Florida's commercial fishing industry is still working 
to recover after hard-hitting impacts of the coronavirus. I sent a 
letter to Secretary Raimondo requesting that Florida's commercial 
fishing industry receive equitable treatment as NOAA considers permit 
allocation for the 2021 Red Snapper Individual Fishing Quota program.

   How will you work with industry and local stakeholders to 
        gather input and take a transparent, evidence-based approach to 
        red snapper permit allocation? How can you apply this method in 
        order bolster sustainable fisheries?

    Answer. I understand both the economic and cultural significance of 
the red snapper fishery to the Gulf of Mexico and southeastern United 
States. I take seriously the National Standards of the Magnuson-Stevens 
Fishery Conservation and Management Act, and I respect the processes of 
the Regional Fishery Management Councils, which uphold the principle of 
fair and equitable treatment to all fishermen in the quota allocation 
process. Furthermore, as I noted in my testimony before the Commerce 
Committee, it is critical that NOAA base management decisions--whether 
for fisheries management or weather forecasting--on the best peer 
reviewed scientific information available.
    If confirmed, I look forward to engaging with Regional Fishery 
Management Councils, state fishery managers, commercial and 
recreational fishermen, and other stakeholders to ensure that fishery 
resources are allocated as equitably as possible among different 
sectors.
                                 ______
                                 
     Response to Written Question Submitted by Hon. Jon Tester to 
                         Col. Pamela A. Melroy
    US Governance of Commercial Space. NASA's partnerships with our 
commercial space industry has brought new and cheaper capabilities to 
NASA, and allows NASA to focus on the ``hard problems.'' The current 
commercial space operating environment, however, is fragmented. The FAA 
is responsible for launch while the DOD (and soon DoC) are responsible 
for on orbit operations.

    Question. Given your extensive experience with the U.S. commercial 
space industry, in your estimation, how can the government better 
organize to help the industry set operating norms and standards so that 
the U.S. continues to be a world leader in commercial space activities?
    Answer. As you note, many Federal agencies have operations in space 
or regulatory responsibilities for commercial space operations. Clear 
roles and responsibilities for these agencies, including which agencies 
should regulate in-space activities would help provide certainty to all 
operators in space. For example, NASA provides expertise to help 
develop standards and best practices for on-orbit operations that can 
be used by other government agencies, other nations, or non-government 
operators in space. The National Space Council (NSpC) can and should 
play a crucial role in orchestrating roles and responsibilities among 
departments and agencies. The Biden-Harris Administration's renewal of 
the NSpC is a positive step and bodes well for an all-of-government 
approach to these issues.
                                 ______
                                 
      Response to Written Questions Submitted by Roger Wicker to 
                         Col. Pamela A. Melroy
Artemis Continuity and Competition
    Question 1. Artemis Program The missions and goals NASA undertakes 
are ambitious, complex, and span multiple presidential administrations 
and congresses. Consistent political leadership, adequate funding, and 
innovative partnerships remain vital to accomplishing these goals. I 
was glad to see President Biden's support for the Artemis program 
earlier this year.

   As Deputy Administrator, how do you plan to keep NASA moving 
        quickly and safely toward the first Artemis lunar landing? Do 
        you support the current architecture plans for the Artemis 
        program, which include the Space Launch System rocket and the 
        future Exploration Upper Stage?

    i.  Follow up: Do you believe that having multiple providers for 
            commercial space transportation programs at NASA enhances 
            safety and competition?

    Answer. I support returning U.S. astronauts to the Moon as quickly 
and as safely as possible. If confirmed, I will work closely with the 
Administrator, NASA leadership, industry, and the Congress to ensure 
the Artemis program has the resources needed for the first crewed 
landing and a sustainable lunar program. NASA needs to work closely 
with its industry partners to maintain insight into the development 
schedule of flight hardware.
    Yes, I support the Artemis architecture, including SLS, the planned 
SLS Block 1B, Orion, Gateway, and the Human Landing System. These 
components are the backbone of our Moon-to-Mars architecture, and many 
of them are in an advanced state of development. The Artemis lunar 
lander system relies on SLS and Orion to launch and transport crew to 
lunar orbit. The Exploration Upper Stage (EUS) is scheduled to be 
available for the fourth Artemis mission, and will provide tremendous 
capability for the program.
    If resources are available, multiple options for commercial 
transportation services can benefit NASA by reducing the risk for 
schedule delays. Developing new space hardware is always a challenge to 
both schedule and cost. I believe competition for these programs is 
important and look forward to working with the administration and 
Congress to ensure commercial programs are adequately resourced.
Sustaining NASA's Infrastructure
    Question 2. NASA's Infrastructure In 2020, Hurricane Zeta struck 
the Gulf Coast and caused significant damage to NASA infrastructure at 
Stennis Space Center and the Michoud Assembly Facility. According to 
NASA, these repairs will cost just over $174 million. These facilities 
represent irreplaceable national assets and the backbone of NASA's 
spacecraft manufacturing and test capabilities.

   Will you work with Administrator Nelson to ensure that these 
        facilities are repaired?

    Answer. Yes, I will work with Administrator Nelson and Congress to 
address NASA's massive infrastructure needs, including damage at 
Stennis Space Center and the Michoud Assembly Facility caused by 
Hurricane Zeta. Over 80 percent of NASA 5,000 buildings and structures 
are beyond their constructed design life. Maintenance and facility 
issues directly impact NASA's missions and employee safety, which is 
unacceptable.
China Competition & New Space Race
    Question 3. China Competition According to the 2019 Annual Report 
published by the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 
China's ambitions are, ``to establish a leading position in the 
economic and military use'' of the space domain. To further its goal, 
China has exploited U.S. export control laws and partnerships with U.S. 
universities to gain access to critical space technologies. Even more 
troubling, the Report identifies China as responsible for cyberattacks 
targeting NASA, NOAA, and U.S. contractor systems.

   Given this pattern of behavior, do you agree that partnering 
        with the People's Republic of China in space would reward 
        egregious acts and prove detrimental to the long-term stability 
        and peaceful use of space?

    Answer. China has exhibited troubling behavior in space and on 
Earth. NASA will continue to follow U.S. law (``the Wolf amendment''), 
which says that the agency will not collaborate with China unless NASA, 
in consultation with the FBI, certifies that the collaboration does not 
risk transferring technology or data with national or economic security 
implications. There are some areas where it may make sense to talk to 
China--for instance sharing space situational awareness data to avoid 
collisions in Earth (or Mars) orbit. However, any such contact should 
be carefully considered to ensure it is in the best interest of the 
United States. The United States must work with its partners to 
continue to establish responsible norms of behavior in space, and call 
China out when they are violated.
Expanding Opportunities for Suborbital Spaceflight and STEM
    Question 4. STEM As you know, one of the most powerful tools for 
building America's future STEM workforce is the broad portfolio of STEM 
education and engagement activities that NASA supports. We have had 
conversations in this committee recently about ensuring that U.S. 
science investment is spread evenly across educational and research 
institutions in more states. Similarly, NASA's STEM efforts should 
strive to spread opportunities across the Nation. Programs such as the 
flight opportunities program and suborbital crew program further this 
goal by making space more accessible for education and research.

   Do you support programs such as Flight Opportunities and 
        Suborbital Crew to expand spaceflight access?

    Answer. Yes, I believe NASA should look at ways to increase 
research and flight opportunities for principal investigators, 
particularly early career researchers. The flight opportunities program 
has benefited the research community by giving them more spaceflight 
opportunities, and it has the added benefit of supporting the growing 
suborbital spaceflight industry. Suborbital space missions provide the 
advantage of low-cost risk reduction prior to transitioning 
technologies to orbital missions. If confirmed, I look forward to being 
fully briefed on this program and others that involve suborbital 
spaceflight to ensure these programs are properly resourced and provide 
value to the taxpayer.
                                 ______
                                 
     Response to Written Question Submitted by Hon. Rick Scott to 
                         Col. Pamela A. Melroy
    Question 1. The 2021 Office of the Director of National 
Intelligence's Annual Threat Assessment of the U.S. intelligence Agency 
stated, ``Beijing is working to match or exceed U.S. capabilities in 
space to gain the military, economic, and prestige benefits that 
Washington has accrued from space leadership.''

   In your view, what is the greatest threat Communist China 
        poses to the United States' dominance in space?

   How can NASA ensure the protection of U.S. space exploration 
        technology and research?

    Answer. China and others are seeking to challenge U.S. space 
superiority. China has increasingly credible, well-resourced plans for 
activity in space--on the Moon and in low Earth orbit. I am most 
concerned about China's disregard for norms of behavior in space that 
threaten the long-term sustainability and usability of space for all 
actors. The recent uncontrolled re-entry of the Long March 5B rocket is 
a prime example of this.
    With regards to China, NASA will continue to follow U.S. law (``the 
Wolf amendment''), which says that the agency will not collaborate with 
China unless NASA, in consultation with the FBI, certifies that the 
collaboration does not risk transferring technology or data with 
national or economic security implications. Additionally, the U.S. 
government as a whole, not just NASA, needs to raise awareness at the 
highest level with industry and universities on the need for vigilance 
and rigor in security systems and practices within their institutions.

    Question 2. What role do you believe the private sector plays in 
the development and advancement of space exploration?
    Answer. I am so proud of how far the commercial space industry has 
come, and I believe they play an important role in NASA's future. In 
human exploration--but also in new areas like Earth science--where NASA 
can leverage commercial capabilities to improve our understanding of 
the changing planet. NASA has long partnered with industry to achieve 
its lofty goals, and I am looking forward to all that we will continue 
to achieve together.

    Question 3. Under the Obama/Biden Administration, the space program 
faced massive budget cuts, and we've since worked to make critical 
enhancements and investments to create thousands of jobs and improve 
infrastructure on Florida's Space Coast.

   Can you discuss how you plan to protect the space program 
        from similar cuts and how you will keep NASA's programs and 
        missions on schedule and within budget?

    Answer. If confirmed, working with the administration and the 
Congress to ensure NASA has resources needed for all of its missions 
will be a top priority. Part of this is better communicating to the 
public how NASA benefits life on Earth.
    An important part of public trust in NASA is improving cost 
estimates and cost and schedule growth. Designing and building new 
space systems is always hard. That said, NASA needs to improve cost 
growth on development programs, or we will never get off Earth. If 
confirmed, I am committed to improving cost growth and look forward to 
keeping the Congress informed of these efforts.
                                 ______
                                 
     Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Jon Tester to 
                          Carlos A. Monje, Jr.
    Highway Formula Funding. The bulk of rural transportation spending 
is formula funding set by Congress during surface transportation 
reauthorization, better known as the Highway bill. It is critical that 
rural formulas are not cut, and ideally, they should grow at a greater 
rate than urbanized formulas.

    Question 1. If confirmed, how will you prioritize rural and Tribal 
transportation, and ensure that these folks do not get left behind?
    Answer. Rural and Tribal areas have unique transportation 
challenges. The fatality rate on rural roads is twice as high as on 
urban roads, and as a result almost half of highway fatalities occur on 
rural roads. 80 percent of closed bridges, and 90 percent of bridges 
with vehicle weight limitations are in rural areas. Two-thirds of rural 
counties only have demand-response transit, which costs twice as much 
to provide per trip as fixed route service. Infrastructure investments 
are key to supporting economic growth and to ensuring that residents in 
rural and Tribal communities have access to jobs, education access and 
essential basic services like health care. If confirmed, I will ensure 
that these folks do not get left behind.
    More broadly, the Nation faces a trillion-dollar backlog of needed 
repairs and we have fallen to 13th in the world in infrastructure. The 
Administration's American Jobs Plan is proposing a total increase of 
$115 billion to modernize bridges, highways, roads, and main streets 
that are in most critical need of repair. This includes funding to 
improve air quality, limit greenhouse gas emissions, and reduce 
congestion. The plan will modernize 20,000 miles of highways, roads, 
and main streets, not only ``fixing them first'' but ``fixing them 
right,'' with safety, resilience, and all users in mind. It will fix 
the most economically significant large bridges in the country in need 
of reconstruction, and it will repair the worst 10,000 smaller bridges, 
including bridges that provide critical connections to rural and tribal 
communities.

    Question 2. Would you agree that rural investments are vital to 
maintaining our national network?
    Answer. Indeed, rural investments are vital to maintaining our 
national network. Freight networks--which benefit the entire economy--
depend heavily on rural infrastructure: 47 percent of truck VMT occurs 
on rural roads, and 2/3 of rail freight originates in rural areas. If 
confirmed, I will work with the Secretary to ensure that the DOT 
implements a balanced investment program that meets the needs of all 
communities, including rural communities. I will also ensure that 
discretionary grant programs meet the selection and reporting 
requirements set forth by Congress. The Department is committed to a 
safe, reliable, and efficient transportation system that serves the 
needs of all users. As noted above, the American Jobs Plan targets 
investment toward rural needs including repairing bridges that provide 
critical connections to rural and tribal communities.

    Question 3. And would you agree that it is critically important for 
rural states to maintain their share of the current highway formulas?
    Answer. The Department is committed to a safe, reliable, and 
efficient transportation system that serves the needs of all users, 
urban and rural. I look forward to working with you and the Committee 
to address the transportation needs of rural communities through the 
American Jobs Plan and surface transportation reauthorization.
                                 ______
                                 
     Response to Written Question Submitted by Hon. Jacky Rosen to 
                          Carlos A. Monje, Jr.
    Federal Transit Administration's Capital Investment Grant program. 
In Nevada, the Regional Transportation Commission (RTC) of Washoe 
County provides critical bus and paratransit services, as well as 
transportation planning and road construction, throughout Washoe 
County, home to Reno. RTC Washoe has told my office that they have two 
projects that were completed on time and under budget--the 4th Street/
Prater Way Bus Rapid Transit Project and the Virginia Street Bus Rapid 
Transit Extension Project.

    Question. Mr. Monje, would you support allowing agencies like RTC 
Washoe to use their project cost savings under the Capital Investment 
Grant program to further enhance these projects?
    Answer. It is always good news when projects are delivered on 
schedule and under budget. Washoe County should be commended for 
successfully completing the two Reno bus rapid transit projects under 
budget. Those projects are able to retain their share of cost savings, 
and I am aware of Washoe County's request to retain some of FTA's 
savings from the project. If confirmed, I am committed to working 
closely with FTA to carefully consider such requests from project 
sponsors, including Washoe County.
                                 ______
                                 
    Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Roger Wicker to 
                          Carlos A. Monje, Jr.
Gulf Coast Rail
    Question 1. Gulf Coast rail service from New Orleans to Mobile was 
halted after Hurricane Katrina. Restoring this service is a top 
priority of mine. Amtrak has filed an application with the Surface 
Transportation Board (STB) to restore service. I appreciated the 
Department's strong letter to STB. I look forward to working with you 
to restore passenger rail service.

   I believe we can find ways to allow freight and passenger 
        rail to coexist as a part of a fluid and efficient rail 
        network. What role can the Department play in directing 
        investments that support a robust rail network?

   Would you have an interest in coming to Mississippi to see 
        the Gulf Coast route?

    Answer. If confirmed, I am committed to working with you and key 
stakeholders, including Amtrak and the freight railroads, to restore 
passenger rail service to the Gulf Coast. The Department has multiple 
grant and loan programs in FRA, FTA, and the Secretary's office to help 
make this restoration of service a reality as part of the American Jobs 
Plan. The Department has also worked with the Surface Transportation 
Board to ensure that freight and passenger rail services can work 
together. As a native of the Gulf Coast, I look forward to making such 
a visit a possibility.
    The Department has also worked with the Surface Transportation 
Board to ensure that freight and passenger rail services can work 
together. As a native of the Gulf Coast, I look forward to making such 
a visit a possibility.
Rural Infrastructure
    Question 2. Within DOT, the Build America Bureau administers 
several grant and loan programs for infrastructure investment. The 
Build America Bureau is an important resource for state and local 
governments that need support in applying for grants or loans and 
pursuing infrastructure projects. In the past, under Secretary Chao's 
leadership, DOT worked to provide more assistance to rural communities 
and address their unmet transportation needs.

   As Under Secretary of Transportation for Policy, what 
        specific steps would you take to improve infrastructure for 
        small towns and rural communities?

   Follow-up: In your experience, have you found the use of 
        advance refunding on tax-exempt municipal bonds helpful on 
        improving infrastructure? Do you agree that providing 
        additional financing tools for local governments, through 
        authorizing a new class of taxable infrastructure bonds, would 
        also be helpful to improving infrastructure across America?

    Answer. Rural and Tribal areas have unique transportation 
challenges. The fatality rate on rural roads is twice as high as on 
urban roads, and as a result almost half of highway fatalities occur on 
rural roads.80 percent of closed bridges, and 90 percent of bridges 
with vehicle weight limitations are in rural areas. Two-thirds of rural 
counties only have demand-response transit, which costs twice as much 
to provide per trip as fixed route service. Infrastructure investments 
are key to supporting economic growth and to ensuring that residents in 
rural and Tribal communities have access to jobs, education access and 
essential basic services like health care. If I am confirmed, I will 
work closely with the Secretary and the Committee on policies that meet 
the needs of all communities, including rural communities.
    This Administration has placed a high priority on addressing our 
Nation's historic underinvestment in infrastructure as demonstrated by 
the President's release of the American Jobs Plan. The Department is 
open to working with Congress on various options to increase the 
available funding for states and localities to address urgent 
transportation infrastructure needs. Additional financing tools can 
play a constructive role for needed infrastructure improvements, the 
Department is more than willing to work with the Congress to provide 
technical assistance on the various eligibilities, requirements, and 
details of these options. I look forward to working with your team to 
better understand your ideas about taxable infrastructure bonds. 
Essential Air Service.

    Question 3. The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has created challenges 
for communities receiving air service through the Essential Air Service 
(EAS) program because passenger air traffic has drastically fallen. The 
FY 2021 Consolidated Appropriations Act requires the Department of 
Transportation to waive some of the subsidy eligibility restrictions 
given the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.

   What is your perspective on how to ensure these and other 
        smaller communities can receive adequate air service?

    Answer. I recognize the financial challenges the EAS program has 
faced under COVID-19 and that the relief provided by the suspension of 
certain eligibility requirements under the Consolidated Appropriations 
Act for FY 2020 and FY 2021 will enable this important program to 
continue to provide support to these communities. As we continue to 
recover from the economic effects of the pandemic, I am committed to 
working with Congress to ensure that the EAS program continues to serve 
small and rural communities.
Bipartisan Infrastructure Legislation
    Question 4. In the last surface transportation reauthorization, the 
FAST Act provided long-term funding certainty for states and the 
transportation sector. The FAST Act was a bipartisan bill with 83 
Senators voting for it. Last year, Congress extended the FAST Act for 
one year. The extension expires September 30, 2021, so Congress will 
need to act to ensure our transportation programs receive funding. I 
believe it is important that infrastructure or surface transportation 
reauthorization be a bipartisan effort in order to represent the 
various infrastructure needs throughout our country.

   With the pending expiration of surface transportation 
        authorization, can you commit to working with me on bipartisan 
        legislation that addresses infrastructure needs in all parts of 
        the country?

    Answer. In my years in the Senate and at DOT, transportation 
authorization and appropriations legislation was drafted, negotiated, 
and passed with significant bipartisan support. If confirmed, I very 
much look forward to working with Secretary Buttigieg and the relevant 
congressional Committees on transportation legislation that addresses 
the needs and priorities of states and localities across the country,
    If I am confirmed, I also look forward to working with stakeholders 
from all parts of the country, ensuring that the Department is 
accessible to and proactively engaging directly with small and rural 
communities and tribal governments and the elected officials who 
represent them.
Pace of Rulemaking
    Question 5. Developing new Federal motor vehicle safety standards 
can take many years, delaying new standards on important safety issues. 
Outmoded standards such as those that conflict with automated vehicles 
have remained in effect for far longer than they should, preventing the 
development of new technologies, for example adaptive headlights.

   As motor vehicles become more advanced and the global 
        competition only grows stronger, how will you work to ensure 
        standards are updated in a timely and appropriate manner, so 
        the U.S. will gain the maximum safety benefits from advances in 
        technology?

    Answer. If I am confirmed, I will be happy to work with Congress to 
create a safer, more efficient transportation system with automated 
vehicles as a priority focus area. This means carefully evaluating 
regulations and making regulatory decisions based on the best available 
data and science. Safety has to be the North Star of our oversight of 
automated vehicles, because Americans expect us to keep them safe when 
they put their lives in the hands of this technology. But you are right 
that the regulation needs to be flexible, data-driven and risk-based.
    DOT takes a holistic approach to identifying rulemaking needs, and 
prioritizes them through publicly released Regulatory Agendas that 
encompasses transportation across all the modes. As part of the 
regulatory agenda formulation we take into account available agency 
resources, priority safety needs that require rulemaking, statutory 
requirements for actions requiring rulemaking, recommendations from the 
National Transportation Safety Board, and other agencies.
    For technical accuracy, suggest something along these lines: . . . 
create a safer, more efficient transportation system with automated 
vehicles as a priority focus area.
U.S.-EU Open Skies
    Question 6. As you are aware, the U.S.-EU Open Skies agreement has 
eliminated government interference in the commercial decisions of air 
carriers about routes, capacity, and pricing. Open Skies has freed up 
carriers to provide more affordable, convenient, and efficient air 
service for consumers. The free marketplace created by Open Skies has 
been a boon for jobs in the aviation industry and beyond. If the U.S. 
takes action that breaches any one of our Open Skies agreements, it 
would put these jobs in jeopardy.

   With the understanding that this administration is committed 
        to our Nation's recovery from Covid-19 and supporting job 
        opportunities for all, will you commit to uphold U.S. trade 
        policy--including Open Skies agreements?

    Answer. The aviation industry is critical to American 
competitiveness. We need to ensure that U.S. airlines have a fair and 
level playing field from which to operate and do not experience 
competitive disadvantages. If I am confirmed, I will support and 
enforce aviation trade agreements and policies that advance the 
interests of the American public, American businesses, and American 
workers.
    Open Skies has been the foundation of U.S. international air 
transportation policy since 1992. The policy has enabled the U.S. 
aviation industry to support more that 10 million American jobs and 
$1.7 trillion in economic activity. We continue to recognize the great 
importance of Open Skies to the Department's diverse stakeholders, 
including airports, airlines, labor, members of the traveling and 
shipping public, and others.
    In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Department has used 
Open Skies tools to protect U.S. interests against various foreign 
governments' discriminatory flight restrictions and troubling crew 
treatment practices.
Autonomous Vehicles (AV)
    Question 7. According to NHTSA, there were over 36,000 deaths on 
Federal highways in 2019. Automated vehicles have the potential to 
significantly reduce traffic fatalities, increase mobility for the 
elderly and disabled, and improve efficiency. Senator Cantwell and I 
have worked alongside the leadership of Senators Thune and Peters in 
advancing the development of AV legislation.

   What steps can and should the Department take to advance the 
        safe testing and deployment of automated vehicles in the U.S. 
        to ensure that the U.S. remains a global leader in innovation?

    Answer. If confirmed, I am eager to work with you and your 
colleagues in Congress to ensure that the Federal government helps to 
lead the way in developing a safe autonomous vehicle industry 
nationwide.
    The Department has released multiple guidance documents to ensure 
AVs are developed, tested, and deployed in a safe manner. These 
documents position the United States to be competitive internationally. 
The Department continues to move forward on standing up and staffing 
the Highly-Automated Systems Safety Center of Excellence, to provide a 
core expertise to validate automation applications across all modes of 
transportation.
    If confirmed, I will work with industry, safety organizations, 
American workers, environmental groups, and other stakeholders to 
maintain the primacy of safety in our work while creating American jobs 
and advancing American technological leadership.
                                 ______
                                 
    Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Dan Sullivan to 
                          Carlos A. Monje, Jr.
Aviation Safety
    A February 2020 NTSB report pointed to a recent 10-year period 
where the total accident rate in Alaska was 2.35 times higher than the 
rest of the United States. During the same period, the fatal accident 
rate in Alaska was 1.34 times higher.
    The FAA Alaska Aviation Safety Initiative is an FAA effort to 
respond to the February 2020 NTSB Report and the Alaska Aviation Safety 
Summit, which I hosted with Administrator Dickson in October 2020. This 
effort will identify safety improvements and investments for the Alaska 
Region, and will make progress on the effort for FAA and DOT to take a 
holistic view of DOT programs to ensure the inherent bias no longer 
inhibits infrastructure investments in our remote Alaska Native 
communities.

    Question 1. Will you support the efforts of the FAA Alaska Aviation 
Safety Initiative?
    Answer. Yes. The Department and I are supportive of the FAA Alaska 
Aviation Safety Initiative. Currently, the FAA is holding outreach 
sessions with a broad spectrum of the aviation stakeholders in Alaska 
aviation, to include air carriers and operators, general aviation, the 
military, and governmental entities to determine how current efforts 
can be reviewed, prioritized, and integrated responsibly to have a 
substantial, positive, and rapid impact on improving aviation safety in 
Alaska. The Department looks forward to working with Congress to ensure 
infrastructure investments are focused on communities that will see the 
most benefit.
Denali Commission Support
    We need Federal partners to identify funding for both rebuilding 
vital infrastructure and to identify adaption strategies for the new 
reality associated with the infrastructure damage in Alaska from 
warming that could cost the state $110 million to $278 million 
annually, per the National Climate Assessment conducted in 2018. While 
visiting Kotzebue in September 2015, then-President Obama identified 
the Denali Commission as a key Federal partner to assist in responding 
to climate change. However, no funding was identified in the budgets of 
previous Administrations to address this challenge.
    Similar to the other regional commissions, the Denali Commission 
used to be allocated Highway Transportation Fund dollars for 
infrastructure. The Denali Access Program used to fund infrastructure 
projects in remote native communities in Alaska.

    Question 2. Would you support funding and revitalizing the Denali 
Access Program to lead with the rebuilding infrastructure impacted by 
erosion and permafrost thaw? What can you do to support this effort?
    Answer. I look forward to working with you and the Committee to 
address the transportation needs of remote native communities in Alaska 
and across the Nation. We will follow Congress' direction in regards to 
the Denali Commission.
    President Biden is committed to increasing resilience in the most 
essential transportation assets and services for vulnerable 
communities, including remote native communities. Building back better 
requires that the funds we invest make our infrastructure more 
resilient in the face of increasingly severe floods, wildfires, 
hurricanes, and other risks.
Open Skies
    Alaska is a critical state for the global aviation industry, 
particularly when it comes to air cargo. Ted Stevens Anchorage 
International Airport (ANC) is home to the fourth busiest cargo airport 
in the world. In 2020, cargo surged significantly and this has 
continued into 2021. ANC has become a critical waypoint for goods, 
including PPE, traveling from all over the world to homes and 
businesses of our constituents confined by the pandemic.
    Even before the pandemic, cargo activity was the source of a 
majority of the good-paying jobs at ANC, with the airport supporting 
about 10 percent of the jobs in Anchorage alone. This is reflection of 
the important relationship our state has with air cargo. Alaskans 
depend on this service for shipments of both import and export 
deliveries of essential goods to support their livelihoods and 
businesses.
    Because of agreements that have been long-sought after and secured 
by the U.S. with more than 130 nations, cargo carriers have been able 
to support the livelihoods of Alaskans and 1.4 million workers 
nationwide. In addition, the agreements enable tourists to easily 
travel to Alaska and support our tourism economy as well as provide 
export markets, which are critical to Alaska's seafood industry--
another source of jobs that are the fabric of Alaska's economy. Sadly, 
both sectors have been battered by the pandemic and we must do 
everything possible to support their recovery.

    Question 3. One of the most important economic and trade policies I 
worked on during my time as the U.S. State Department's Assistant 
Secretary for Economic, Energy and Business Affairs was Open Skies and 
securing air transport agreements with nations around the world. I was 
confident these agreements would spur innovation and jobs then and I am 
proud to see the results today, especially in terms of jobs generated 
and economic benefits to Alaska. If you are to become the U.S. 
Department of Transportation's Undersecretary for Policy, will you 
ensure the U.S. remains firmly committed to these agreements that 
support the cargo industry's ability to support good paying jobs and 
the timely transport of goods and other potentially lifesaving 
deliveries to our communities?
    Answer. The aviation industry is critical to American 
competitiveness, and the Ted Stevens Anchorage International Airport 
maintains a notably significant role in the movement of international 
cargo between the United States and Asia, including PPE. The Department 
continues to support Anchorage's unique and valuable position as a 
cargo hub, through a specific grant of a request from Alaska for 
exemption authority to allow foreign airlines to more easily transfer 
their U.S.-bound cargo at Anchorage. This grant has also been recently 
expanded to passenger transfers as well, further attracting airlines to 
utilize Anchorage and benefit Alaska's tourism industry.
    Open Skies has been the foundation of U.S. international air 
transportation policy since 1992. The policy has enabled the U.S. 
aviation industry to support more that 10 million American jobs and 
$1.7 trillion in economic activity. Through our current Open Skies 
agreements with over 130 foreign partners, U.S. airlines enjoy greater 
flexibility to provide more affordable, convenient, and efficient air 
service to both U.S. travelers and shippers. If I am confirmed, I will 
support and enforce aviation trade agreements and policies that advance 
the interests of the American public, American businesses, and American 
workers.

                                  [all]

