
 - OVERSIGHT OF THE UNITED STATES CAPITOL POLICE

[Senate Hearing 117-533]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]


                                                       S. Hrg. 117-533

                     OVERSIGHT OF THE UNITED STATES
                             CAPITOL POLICE

=======================================================================

                                HEARING

                               BEFORE THE

                 COMMITTEE ON RULES AND ADMINISTRATION
                          UNITED STATES SENATE

                    ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

                             SECOND SESSION

                               __________

                           DECEMBER 19, 2022

                               __________

    Printed for the use of the Committee on Rules and Administration
    
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]    


                  Available on http://www.govinfo.gov
                  
                               __________

                                
                    U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE                    
50-218                      WASHINGTON : 2023                    
          
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
                 
                 COMMITTEE ON RULES AND ADMINISTRATION

                             SECOND SESSION

                  AMY KLOBUCHAR, Minnesota, Chairwoman

DIANNE FEINSTEIN, California         ROY BLUNT, Missouri
CHARLES E. SCHUMER, New York         MITCH McCONNELL, Kentucky
MARK R. WARNER, Virginia             RICHARD SHELBY, Alabama
PATRICK J. LEAHY, Vermont            TED CRUZ, Texas
ANGUS S. KING, JR., Maine            SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West 
JEFF MERKLEY, Oregon                     Virginia
ALEX PADILLA, California             ROGER WICKER, Mississippi
JON OSSOFF, Georgia                  DEB FISCHER, Nebraska
                                     CINDY HYDE-SMITH, Mississippi
                                     BILL HAGERTY, Tennessee

                    Elizabeth Peluso, Staff Director
               Rachelle Graves, Republican Staff Director
                         
                         
                         C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

                              ----------                              
                                                                  Pages

                         Opening Statement of:

Hon. Amy Klobuchar, Chairwoman, a United States Senator from the 
  State of Minnesota.............................................     1
Hon. Roy Blunt, a United States Senator from the State of 
  Missouri.......................................................     4
J. Thomas Manger, Chief of Police, United States Capitol Police, 
  Washington, DC.................................................     8

                         Prepared Statement of:

J. Thomas Manger, Chief of Police, United States Capitol Police, 
  Washington, DC.................................................    22

                  Questions Submitted for the Record:

Hon. Amy Klobuchar, Chairwoman, a United States Senator from the 
  State of Minnesota to J. Thomas Manger, Chief of Police, United 
  States Capitol Police, Washington, DC..........................    36
Hon. Dianne Feinstein, a United States Senator from the State of 
  California to J. Thomas Manger, Chief of Police, United States 
  Capitol Police, Washington, DC.................................    37
Hon. Mark Warner, a United States Senator from the State of 
  Virginia to J. Thomas Manger, Chief of Police, United States 
  Capitol Police, Washington, DC.................................    41
Hon. Shelley Capito, a United States Senator from the State of 
  West Virginia to J. Thomas Manger, Chief of Police, United 
  States Capitol Police, Washington, DC..........................    43

 
             OVERSIGHT OF THE UNITED STATES CAPITOL POLICE

                              ----------                              


                       MONDAY, DECEMBER 19, 2022

                               United States Senate
                      Committee on Rules and Administration
                                                     Washington, DC
    The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 3:32 p.m., in 
Room 301, Russell Senate Office Building, Hon. Amy Klobuchar, 
Chairwoman of the Committee, presiding.
    Present: Senators Klobuchar, Blunt, King, Ossoff, Wicker, 
and Fischer.

  OPENING STATEMENT OF HONORABLE AMY KLOBUCHAR, CHAIRWOMAN, A 
       UNITED STATES SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF MINNESOTA

    Chairwoman Klobuchar. I call the Committee to order. It is 
wonderful to be here for the last hearing with my close friend, 
Ranking Member Blunt.
    I am going to say a few words about him shortly. But it is 
fitting, I would say, that we are ending with this important 
oversight hearing of the Capitol Police, because it has defined 
so much of our work during the last two years, and we are 
forever grateful to the men and women of the Capitol Police.
    It is a part, I know, of Senator Blunt's job that he has 
always liked. You will always find him, as you know Chief, with 
the officers. During the holiday season, you will find him with 
them every step of the way.
    It was my privilege to see the officers and their families 
presented with the Congressional Gold Medal earlier this month 
for their courage defending our democracy on January 6th. 
Senator Blunt and I led the bill, and we are very excited that 
we have had the honor of the Congressional Gold Medal being 
bestowed upon the police.
    Next month will mark two years since January 6th, since the 
peaceful transfer of power that historically we have seen that 
day, the Electoral Count Act day when the ballots are counted 
from each state, when we saw this disrupted with an 
insurrection.
    As we know it was more than an assault on a building, it 
was an assault on our democracy, and it was an actual life and 
death situation for so many of our officers on duty that day.
    As we have heard testimony in our joint hearings with the 
Homeland Security Committee that we all took part in, our 
officers performed heroically under unimaginable circumstances, 
suffering many injuries and in some cases, loss of life.
    Tragically, five officers passed away following the attack. 
Capitol Police Officer Brian Sicknick died the next day. Four 
other officers died in the days and months that followed, 
Capitol Police Officer Howard Liebengood and DC Metropolitan 
Police Officers Jeffrey Smith, Gunther Hashida, and Kyle 
DeFreytag.
    Many more suffered injuries and even more suffered 
emotional trauma that day. Later that spring, we also lost 
Officer Billy Evans, who gave his life defending our Capitol 
right there at the front Senate gate. Many of us remember Billy 
personally, and I have been honored to get to know his family 
and his kids.
    We owe it to the officers who stand in defense of the 
Capitol to make sure that they have the resources and support 
they need. I want to acknowledge, first of all, the 
Department's work to expand mental health support for officers, 
including establishing the Howard Liebengood Center for 
Wellness after we passed funding for it in last year's 
emergency appropriations legislation.
    After that heroic day, Senator Blunt and I, as I mentioned, 
worked with Senator Portman and Senator Peters to hold hearings 
and issue a bipartisan report with the Homeland Security 
Committee with recommendations that could be implemented 
without delay. This is our sixth hearing on Capitol security 
during this Congress.
    Significant progress has been made to implement our 
recommendations for the entities charged with protecting the 
Capitol. The majority have been put into effect entirely, as 
well as more than 75 percent of the Capitol Police Inspector 
General's 103 recommendations.
    Through these efforts, the Department has improved its 
handling of intelligence by hiring a new Intelligence Director 
and sharing information with rank and file officers, 
prioritized operational planning by requiring plans for large 
scale events, and used the resources in last year's emergency 
appropriations legislation to ensure officers have the training 
and the equipment that they need.
    We will never forget the stories of the riot gear left in 
the buses locked. We will never forget the stories of what a 
high percentage--and of course, you were not chief then--but 
what a high percentage of our officers were not equipped with 
riot gear.
    In fact, the people attacking them in some cases had gear 
that they did not even have themselves. The Department also 
faced the difficult task of confronting a shortfall in officers 
since January 6th, which placed even more pressure on those 
protecting our Capitol. I appreciate your work, Chief, to take 
this on head on to restore morale and confidence in your ranks.
    I still remember when I knew that the morale was improving 
about six months after the attack. I remember how difficult it 
was in those weeks and months afterwards. But about six months 
after the attack, I was outside in the parking area and I was 
standing there and one of the officers was talking to me, and 
one of your other officers was on bike patrol and he put up his 
megaphone and he said, Officer, the name of the guy I was 
talking to, ``do you need backup? Do you need backup?''
    I thought at that moment, whatever is going on, there has 
been some improvement in morale that people can once again have 
a little moment of fun and appreciate the surroundings that 
they are in. As I have told your officers, including last week, 
they are the ones that are on the front line every single day 
for our safety and also the front line of what visitors to the 
Capitol see.
    Your efforts have paid off, Chief, as the Department met 
its goal to hire 280 officers this year and is on track to do 
the same next year. Your work to recruit more officers and 
overcome attrition has been integral to reopening the Capitol. 
We have had tour groups back for nearly nine months now, and 
the Capitol Visitor Center reopened about seven months ago.
    Just last week, another entrance to the Senate office 
buildings opened, and we will open at least one more in January 
when the public galleries are planned to be open as well. We 
know it has been long, long in coming, but we understand your 
plan to ensure our safety and slowly and surely open up some of 
these areas because we could not do it all at once and we still 
cannot do every single thing we were doing before. There has 
been significant progress, but there is also much more to do.
    I know you know in that one of those goals is to confront 
the dramatic rise in threats targeting Members of Congress. 
While the Department has hired more threat assessment agents 
and opened two field offices to counter these threats, more 
must be done.
    Chief, I know you have presented a proposal to the Capitol 
Police Board laying out resources that the Department needs to 
be effective given the current threat landscape to ensure 
Members are safe when they are away from the Capitol.
    One of the things we also talked about in that last meeting 
that Senator Blunt and I attended was about the prosecution of 
these cases, which is not under your purview, one thing that is 
not, but making sure that they occur, and I have already 
contacted the Justice Department about that.
    Another thing we should do without delay is to pass my 
bipartisan proposal with Senator Cruz to provide for the 
removal of Members of Congress private information from the 
internet, similar to a provision for Federal judges that was 
just included in the NDAA, and I continue to work to get this 
done by the end of the year. I look forward to hearing from you 
today, Chief.
    Now, before I turn it over to Senator Blunt, I wanted to 
talk a little bit about his work and recognize the importance 
of his service, not just to this Committee, but really to our 
Capitol and to our country.
    Through our work leading the Rules Committee, sometimes he 
has been Chair, sometimes I have been Chair. Sometimes it just 
does not matter who is Chair because we work together so well. 
I have gotten to see firsthand Chairman Blunt, former Chairman, 
now Ranking Member Blunt's deep respect for our Constitution, 
for the Senate, and our democracy.
    As a former top election official in Missouri, Senator 
Blunt's experience benefited our Committee as we worked to 
support the work of election administrators, including 
highlighting the rise in threats in the hearing we did last 
year. Since coming to the Senate, Senator Blunt's love for this 
institution has come through in his efforts to make this a 
better place to work.
    That includes not okaying every request we get from every 
Member, but whenever we can, we try to do that. It includes 
joining with me to reform the outdated process of reporting and 
handling sexual harassment claims on Capitol Hill. Many great 
improvements were made that have been helpful for this 
institution.
    It includes updating the rules for new parents when we 
worked to ensure that Senator Duckworth and future parents can 
bring their babies to the Senate floor. He has also been a 
great partner to me on many other issues, including we co-
chaired the Travel and Tourism Caucus and passed Brand USA 
several times. He co-chaired the Adoption Caucus with me. We 
got a number of bills passed over the years. He himself, the 
parent of adopted child Charlie Blunt, that he loves so much, 
and he has taken that heart and put it into that issue as well.
    Above all else, Senator Blunt's career here has been 
defined by service. He is more interested in getting things 
done than getting the accolades. Although I know talking to 
your wife, Abby, there have been a lot of accolades in recent 
months, buildings named after you, airports named after you, 
all well-deserved.
    But what I will most remember about Senator Blunt is that 
moment on January 6th, when it was just the two of us and Vice 
President Pence walking through that corridor that in the 
morning had been a place of celebration, walking through the 
broken glass, the spray painted columns to do our jobs.
    When we came back at--then it was about 4:30 in the 
morning, when it was all done and democracy had prevailed, he 
and I decided to go downstairs to look at the damage to the 
Parliamentarian office and other offices. It was a horrendous 
sight, pictures broken, their own personal belongings all over 
the floor.
    We knew then that our work had not ended really that day, 
but our work had just begun to protect the security of the 
Capitol. But I most remember in a typical Roy Blunt way, as we 
walked out of that office and the sun is coming out, he turns 
to me in all seriousness and says, ``well, see you tomorrow.''
    I said, ``tomorrow is here, but I will.'' I think that is 
what we say to Senator Blunt today, that we will see you 
tomorrow and we will see you many days to come. And we are all 
so excited that Senator Fischer will actually become the 
Ranking Member. She and I get along very well.
    She had asked me to be her Democratic mentor, whatever that 
meant, when she came to the Senate. I tried my best, and we are 
really excited that she is going to be filling in here and 
becoming the Ranking Member.
    But Roy, we are all going to miss you. I know Angus came in 
specifically to recognize your work, and we thank you, Roy, for 
all you have done and we should give you applause here.
    [Applause.]

   OPENING STATEMENT OF HONORABLE ROY BLUNT, A UNITED STATES 
               SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF MISSOURI

    Senator Blunt. I thank all of you. As Abby Blunt would 
quickly point out, there have been plenty of recognitions for 
me, and she is doing her job to be sure that I keep that in 
some balance by representing the other side of the question of 
how capable I may or may not be. But glad to be here with all 
of you.
    This is a unique Committee, and the opportunity to be so 
involved all the time, and sometimes almost too involved--some 
days just the daily operation of the Senate, it gives those of 
us who have done management things like the Governor and others 
a chance to have a little bit of that management desire 
fulfilled, a chance to really work directly with the Chief, and 
the Librarian of Congress, and the Director of the Smithsonian, 
and unfortunately, the food service companies and the things 
that are--really have been complicated the last few years is 
the visits to the Capitol were dramatically changed when the 
Capitol building itself was not open.
    But I appreciate your kind words. You know, we have served 
on this Committee together, both in 2017 and then dramatically 
in 2021. We were two of the four people that joined first Vice 
President Biden in 2017 and then by Vice President Pence in 
2021 to go through the process of certifying the election.
    Then only a few days later, two weeks in fact later, in 
2021, at the exact same location where our great Capitol Police 
force and Metropolitan Police force had been trying to defend 
the Capitol and did defend the Capitol, we were out there where 
we should be for the whole world to watch the peaceful 
transition of power.
    From that day, I was the Chairman at that event, and the 
Chairman has some gavels to use that day as necessary. Here is 
one for you, and the base says the 59th Presidential 
Inauguration, January 20, 2021.
    Chairwoman Klobuchar. Thank you.
    Senator Blunt. As you pointed out, we worked on so many 
things, it has almost made the work of this Committee seamless. 
We go from two or three different issues. We are working on 
from adoption to travel, to visa to commerce all at once, and 
we have been great friends and I look forward to that continued 
friendship with you and others on the Rules Committee.
    I have been Chairman twice--let's see, I was Chairman, then 
Senator Shelby was Chairman, then I was Chairman again. It has 
been great to work with you in this divided Congress as you 
become Chairwoman. I know I am leaving the Committee in good 
hands as Senator Fischer moves into the position of Ranking 
Member at the beginning of the next Congress.
    She has been a Member of the Rules Committee since she came 
to Congress after the 2012 election, and I feel confident that 
the two of you are going to do great things for the Senate and 
the people who work here.
    One of the most important functions, of course, is our 
relationship with the police, the Capitol Police, who every 
Member of Congress sees multiple times every day from the 
moment we walk in, as a matter of fact usually before we walk 
in, until the moment we walk out of the building, and then the 
moment we are headed away from the Capitol.
    Chief Manger was hired in the wake of the events of January 
the 6th. He brought incredible experience to this job, having 
been the chief of two of the very biggest neighboring 
jurisdictions. I am eager to hear his assessment of where we 
are on the recommendations we made.
    You know, that coming quickly with our Committee and the 
other oversight committee and having those hearings, having a 
set of recommendations within just a couple of months really of 
the time that we started looking at this. I know one of the 
things we will talk to the chief today is about that.
    Also later this afternoon, you and I--Chairwoman, you and I 
will both be at an event where the 2021 Freedom Award is 
awarded--the 2022 Freedom Award recipients will be awarded, and 
that is the Capitol Police and the Metropolitan Police. Chief 
Manger and Chief Contee will be there to recognize that--and 
accept that recognition. I think that award was started 20 
years ago in 1993.
    That was the 200th anniversary of George Washington laying 
the cornerstone for the Capitol that would be begun here and 
was finished a few years later in Washington. But the Freedom 
Award named for the statue on the top of the Capitol, the 
Statue of Freedom.
    Chief, your officers and the Metropolitan Police officers 
who arrived immediately when called, made an incredible 
difference that day, as they do every day.
    Senator Klobuchar and I and the rest of the Members of the 
Committee are honored to be able to welcome you here today. 
Thank you, Chairwoman.
    Chairwoman Klobuchar. Very good. Senator Fischer, you want 
to add something? Thank you, Senator Wicker, for being here as 
well.
    Senator Fischer. Thank you, Madam Chair. I want to thank 
Senator Blunt for his time as Chair and Ranking Member of this 
Committee. As the former top election official in Missouri, his 
firsthand knowledge of the elections process was incredibly 
valuable to this Committee.
    Senator Blunt understands every policy issue that comes 
before him with a curious mind and tireless attention to 
detail. He has always been a trusted voice in our conference 
and an exceptional member of leadership.
    As Leader McConnell said earlier this month, Senator Blunt 
has time and again wound up in the middle of high stakes, high 
profile work. Yet he remains the same humble and approachable 
Missourian who first got into this business to help his 
neighbors.
    I want to thank Roy for his work to ensure a smooth 
transition to me as the new Ranking Member on this Committee. 
He has been very helpful in this process, ensuring that both 
the Republican Rules Committee staff and my personal staff have 
the information they need, and that we are all in a position to 
succeed.
    In the video announcing his retirement, Senator Blunt stood 
on the dairy farm where he grew up and said that he planned to 
finish strong, and he certainly has. After 14 general election 
victories and 26 years in Congress, Senator Blunt has a lot to 
be proud of.
    I know we are certainly going to miss him here in the 
Senate. Missourians, Nebraskans, and all Americans are better 
off thanks to his selfless service. Thank you. Good job, Roy.
    Chairwoman Klobuchar. Really nice. Thank you for mentioning 
Senator Blunt's tremendous staff that really work seamlessly, 
as you noted. Senator Wicker, you want to add anything, and 
then maybe Senator King.
    Senator Wicker. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair. I spoke 
from my heart on the Senate floor several days ago after 
Senator Blunt's farewell address.
    Let me just echo what Senator Fischer has said and say how 
fortunate I feel to have served with Roy Blunt, both on this 
Committee, on the Commerce Committee, in the House, and in the 
United States Senate. I got to the House two years before he 
did. I got over here to the Senate a little bit before he did. 
But I was well aware that once he got here, he would 
immediately move into leadership.
    I was tickled to be a part of that little, small cadre of 
people that encouraged Senator Blunt to run for leadership at a 
very early point in his Senate career. Senator Fischer 
mentioned high stakes and high profile moments in quoting our 
distinguished Republican leader.
    It does seem that when fortune smiles on us, whether by 
chance or by providence, the right person happens to be at the 
right place, in the right position, at the right time. I think 
of January 20, 2017, when we showed the world once again what 
President Reagan said was a both profound and commonplace 
moment.
    Commonplace because it occurs every four years. Profound 
because it occurs every four years on the dot. The way our 
friend from Missouri was asked to be in charge of that orderly 
Constitutional transfer of power, and then it happens that our 
friend Roy was called on to be the symbol of that orderly 
Constitutional transfer after a time when the decision was much 
more contentious.
    I cannot think of another fellow citizen of the United 
States who would have been in a better--who would have been 
better capable of carrying that off and making that day once 
again, profound and commonplace. I thank the Chair for 
reminding me earlier today that----
    Chairwoman Klobuchar. He means sending him a text.
    Senator Wicker [continuing]. this was a special command 
performance to me, and I am grateful to her for reminding me. 
Also, I am grateful to both of you for allowing me to remodel 
my committee room before any others. We would not have done it 
without the leadership of these two great friends on the 
Committee.
    Roy, congratulations to you. Surely this is the last time I 
will have to wax sentimental, but it has been a great run. You 
have been a great public servant and will always be my great 
friend.
    Chairwoman Klobuchar. All right. Thank you, Senator Wicker, 
for bringing up the inauguration, which I had not, and that was 
an incredible moment. As you mentioned, both inaugurations, 
where Roy just really stood out for his work. Thank you. 
Senator King.
    Senator King. Very briefly, because everything has been 
said, Roy was one of the first people I met when I got here. In 
just a few weeks, I do not even think I had been sworn in yet. 
We had a chat and we found that we were both adoptive parents, 
and we shared the fact that any adoptive parent will tell you 
that you fall in love with those kids just like any other kids.
    How important that--and both in fact adoptive parents of 
children from abroad, and the important thing about making them 
part of our family. Unfortunately, we have not had a chance to 
really work together very much on legislation, but my 
observation of Roy, a couple of points.
    One is the example of leadership is so important. We tend 
to think of leadership as speeches and pushing and amendments 
and arguing and debating. Just the example that you set of 
dignity, common sense, a thoughtfulness has been an example to 
me, and I think it is one that is so important to your 
colleagues. That is one of the reasons you are going to be so 
missed.
    One of the definitions of courage is grace under pressure. 
I think on January 6th, and again on January 21st, which was--
January 20th, rather, which was not a--it was not a foregone 
conclusion how things were going to go that day, it was your 
grace under pressure, your steadiness, that I think meant so 
much to all of us, but mostly to the country, mostly to the 
country.
    I love Ronald Reagan's comment that it is commonplace is 
profound. Profound because it is commonplace, because what we 
have here is very unusual in human history and it is fragile, 
as we learned.
    Your steadiness and good common sense, goodness, Midwestern 
common sense--I am married to a girl from the Midwest, and she 
reminds me of that, a woman from the Midwest.
    Chairwoman Klobuchar. That is okay.
    Senator King. We have been married almost 40 years. Anyway, 
Roy, you have meant so much to all of us, but you have meant so 
much to the country. Thank you deeply for your service.
    Chairwoman Klobuchar. Very good. Very nice. I actually have 
a picture of us, Roy, that I like because it looks like you are 
maybe thinking, what is she saying? Anyway, it is great. There 
you are. I am now, my job----
    Senator Blunt. Chief, I guess you thought this hearing was 
about you.
    [Laughter.]
    Chairwoman Klobuchar [continuing]. is to introduce Chief 
Manger, the Chief of the United States Capitol Police. He was 
sworn into his current position on July 23, 2021, after a 
distinguished 42 year career in law enforcement--longer than 
Angus has been married--most recently serving for 15 years as 
Chief of Police in Montgomery County, Maryland. Earlier in his 
career, he served as Chief of Police in Fairfax County, 
Virginia, where he rose through the ranks after first joining 
the force following his graduation from the University of 
Maryland.
    I will now swear in the witness. If you would, please stand 
and raise your right hand. Do you swear that the testimony you 
will give before the Committee shall be the truth, the whole 
truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you God?
    Mr. Manger. I do.
    Chairwoman Klobuchar. Thank you, Chief. You can be seated, 
and you are recognized for five minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF J. THOMAS MANGER, CHIEF OF POLICE, UNITED 
             STATES CAPITOL POLICE, WASHINGTON, DC

    Mr. Manger. Thank you. Chairwoman Klobuchar, Ranking Member 
Blunt, distinguished Members of the Committee, thank you for 
this opportunity to share with you the many initiatives 
currently underway to strengthen the United States Capitol 
Police Department.
    Having been in this position for nearly a year and a half, 
we now move from fixing the immediate problems identified on 
January 6th and its aftermath, to better positioning the 
Department for the future.
    The USCP's mission is highly complex. To fulfill our 
responsibilities, we need to flexibly--the flexibility to pivot 
seamlessly from our public order responsibilities, to our 
investigative responsibilities, to our protection 
responsibilities.
    My first priority when I arrived here was fixing the 
systemic deficiencies that lay at the root of its operational 
and intelligence capabilities. The Department identified, 
prioritized, and remediated the most significant gaps, 
including those identified by this Committee, such as 
developing Department wide operational plans for special 
events, training and equipping the Civil Disturbance Unit, and 
improving the Department's intelligence gathering and sharing 
capabilities.
    These front burner priorities have largely been remediated. 
In fact, of the 103 inspector general recommendations that came 
out in the flash reports, 70 of them have been closed, with 
most others on a glide path to closure. While certain items 
remain on the Department's post January 6th to do list, we are 
working on three key areas, threat investigations, fully 
reopening the Capitol, and staffing.
    Among the most significant challenges that we are facing is 
the ever changing threat landscape. Hate, intolerance, and 
violence are part of a disturbing trend. This past year, the 
Department saw more than 9,000 threats against Members of 
Congress. The attacks on Representative Lee Zeldin and Paul 
Pelosi, as well as the threats directed toward other Members of 
Congress, are a sad reminder of the extent to which our social 
fabric has frayed.
    Not surprisingly then, the bulk of the Department's current 
efforts are directed to threat assessment and mitigation. These 
efforts include an increase in the number of dignitary 
protection agents, as well as the training of a reserve team to 
supplement protection advance teams, enhance security 
protections for Members, their families, and their homes.
    To that end, the Department has presented a list of 
security recommendations and options to the Capitol Police 
Board and the relevant Appropriations Committees of both 
chambers.
    These recommendations span the gamut of enhanced security 
protections and include the installation of state of the art 
residential security systems for every Member of Congress, the 
creation of a protection operations center, and the expansion 
of memorandums of understanding with local law enforcement 
agencies nationwide.
    With the increase of USCP staffing over the past year, I am 
confident that we are on track to meet our goal of fully 
reopening the Capitol. However, to meet our ever growing 
workload demands, our goal is to increase the sworn police 
staffing to more than 2,000 officers, and our civilian staff to 
over 450 by the end of Fiscal Year 2023.
    Since January 6th, we have hired over 350 new recruits, 175 
of which have graduated from the Academy and are now covering 
posts throughout the Capitol grounds. Our hiring and 
recruitment efforts also include 55 contract Capitol security 
officers, a launch of lateral hiring program, and the payment 
of retention bonuses.
    These enhancements should enable the Department to meet its 
target of fully reopening the Capitol to pre-COVID levels 
within the next three months. As part of the Department's 
continuous transformation, we are working on a Department wide 
reorganization plan.
    Not only is this in response to the recommendations and 
findings of various after action reports, it is also necessary 
to establish a structure that fosters and reinforces 
accountability, internal controls, and employee development. We 
have submitted our proposal to the Board, which is currently 
under review.
    Once approved, it will allow a number of senior leadership 
positions to be filled. Our ability to enhance the protection 
of Members and their families is part of a holistic law 
enforcement and investigative process. It is not enough just to 
identify the bad actors.
    Those that commit prosecutable offenses must be called to 
account for their actions within the criminal justice system. 
Recognizing that these threats are difficult to prosecute, it 
is disheartening to me that our prosecution rate remains so 
low.
    We have made significant inroads on that front by 
establishing three special United States attorney positions 
assigned to the Capitol Police for the express purpose of 
prosecuting those threat cases. Let me conclude by stating that 
our increasing workload, the current threat landscape, and 
future challenges both known and unknown, will require 
additional resources.
    This is a reality, and I say this fully acknowledging all 
the support that we have received so far. But if we are to 
build, enhance, and protect to the scale of the entire 
Congress, we cannot do it based on our current resources.
    Simply stated, if we are to keep pace with the workload 
demands, as well as the Members' expectations, the focus should 
be on where we are today and the Department's vision for the 
future.
    I am steadfast and resolute in ensuring that an incident 
like January 6th never happens again. All of our projects and 
initiatives require the support of the Board and our oversight 
committees. Your Committee has provided constructive input and 
oversight.
    At the same time, it has been a staunch supporter of the 
Department, and I thank you.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Manger was submitted for the 
record.]
    Chairwoman Klobuchar. Thank you very much, Chief. For his 
last hearing, we are going to have Senator Blunt go first, then 
I will ask questions, and then Senator King, and then whatever 
Republican is next. Thank you.
    Senator Blunt. All right. Thank you, Chair. Chief, on the 
recommendations that we made after January the 6th, I think you 
have completed about 75 percent of those. It is also my 
impression that you may need more funding or more authority, or 
both, to really address the remaining numbers. Is that correct?
    Mr. Manger. The authority, not as much. That was provided 
and that has been working fine. In terms of the funding, what 
we have done in the first year or so has addressed the security 
here at the Capitol.
    Then what we really have to focus on now are the threats 
against Members. That is not only addressing the threats while 
you are here in the Capitol, but when you are in your home 
districts as well.
    Those protection responsibilities will require additional 
resources. We have got in our Fiscal Year 2023 budget, for 
instance, there are a number of requests for additional 
positions that address the protection responsibilities that--
where we really need to focus.
    Senator Blunt. Currently you have vacancies of about, what, 
10 percent still vacant? Tell me, how many officers do you have 
right now?
    Mr. Manger. We have right now about 1,970 officers.
    Senator Blunt. You are authorized to have?
    Mr. Manger. We are authorized to have over 2,000, or close 
to 2,100. Yes, we are about, I think, 10 percent down. But I 
have to share with you that I just was informed today that as 
we speak, we have 219 recruits in some level of training, 
whether they are--whether we just brought them on a week ago, 
to the ones that are just about to graduate.
    We have got 219 recruits in the pipeline, which I think 
sets us up very well, and we will continue to work on our 
hiring, recruiting and hiring initiatives so that we keep 
those--that pipeline full so that we can meet our goal of 
hiring those 280 officers per year for the next couple of 
years.
    Senator Blunt. How many officers have you brought in in the 
year and a half that you have been the Chief?
    Mr. Manger. Close to 200. When you couple that with the 
attrition, we are in fact--in fact, the last time that I was in 
front of this Committee, we had--we have now 100 more officers 
than we had then.
    Senator Blunt. How is the addition of the contract 
employees go for the jobs you have been able to assign to 
someone who was not a sworn and totally prepared officer?
    Mr. Manger. That, I think, has gone very well. The key 
there is to identify the posts that it would be suitable to 
have a contract security or Capitol Security Officer. These are 
primarily secondary posts, and we have got about 50 or so 
assigned.
    Right now we are looking for other opportunities. If there 
are other posts where we can use those Capitol Security 
Officers, we will. But right now, we have got about 50 of them 
in place.
    That is 50 posts where we used to have Capitol Police 
Officers that are now freed up with these security officers 
staffing those locations.
    Senator Blunt. As you move to more security for Members at 
their--in their state, what kind of additional personnel will 
you need there?
    Mr. Manger. Part of the options that I presented to the 
Capitol Police Board is to do for the entire Congress what the 
House has begun to do for their Members, where every Member of 
Congress would have a security system in their home, in their 
district offices, so that it would add a layer of protection 
for not only the Member, but their family and their staff as 
well.
    One of the things that I would--have recommended is to have 
a protection--to stand up a protection operations center so 
that we would have our folks, and this could be done by 
civilians, it would not have to be sworn officers, but have our 
folks monitor those security systems.
    They would also be monitored by the company that installed 
them. But to have that redundancy and to have that instant 
recognition, if there is a problem, and instant response, if 
there is a problem, I think provides exactly what we need in 
terms of enhancing the protection. We want to stand up the 
protection operations center.
    The big ask really has to do with the number of protection 
agents for the Members. Right now, we, I think, do not provide 
the level of protection to some of the leadership that perhaps 
we should. It is certainly not on par with what is done in the 
Executive Branch, and I think we need to look at that and 
strengthen some of the protection details that we have in 
place.
    But as a result of the number of threats that are coming in 
and the number of credible threats that we have some concern 
about, I believe that we need to strongly expand our--the 
number of protection agents that we have.
    Again, I have got I think in the Fiscal Year 2023 budget, 
there were 64 positions, additional special agent positions, 
that would be assigned to protection details. With the demands 
that we have, this is both in terms of protection and 
investigation of threats, I think this is the big ask that we 
have.
    Senator Blunt. Thank you. I may have more questions later, 
Chairwoman, but--[technical problems]----
    Chairwoman Klobuchar. Very good. Senator King has an 
important call coming up, so I am going to have him go next.
    Senator King. Thank you, Senator. Chief, just to give you 
an idea of how far the Capitol Police have come. I had a friend 
who was a Capitol policeman in the 60's, and he told me that 
the firearms competency test consisted of handing the recruit a 
gun and having them shoot at the target until they hit it.
    Then they were--successfully passed the test. Fortunately, 
I think we have gone beyond those days. I want to compliment 
you on your recruiting. I think the challenge of protection at 
home is a huge, serious challenge. If we had--well, as 
Governor, I had a trooper with me 24 hours a day for 8 years.
    If we went to that level for every Member of Congress, it 
would be hugely expensive and in many ways obtrusive. It seems 
to me that one fruitful area that you might think about 
pursuing, and you may already be doing this, is a cooperative 
relationship with local police departments and State Police, 
who the Members are not home all the time, but they can be 
there, at least be on call and perhaps even go further in terms 
of being present for public events and those kinds of things.
    Is that something that might be a way to solve this without 
hiring another, you know, 435 times 5?
    Mr. Manger. Absolutely. We have--one of the other things 
that I forgot to mention, Senator, was the getting together a 
small staff that would work full-time in developing those 
relationships with the state and local law enforcement for 
every Member of Congress.
    If we, you know, there is 538 jurisdictions that would be 
involved and we would have, get those MOU's in place so that we 
would not have to wait for a crisis to make the first call to 
that local agency saying, hey, can you help us out? We would 
have those, and we will use in place ahead of time, so it would 
be a very efficient process to get the help we need.
    Your suggestion about having local law enforcement at 
events where there may be issues, where, you know, the public 
will be there, and perhaps the Member even has a couple of 
threats that they are concerned about, having local law 
enforcement there is something that we want to do routinely.
    The advantage that we have now is that as a result of the 
supplemental from last year, we have funding that we can 
reimburse these jurisdictions. Many of these jurisdictions, you 
know, have told us, look, we have staffing shortages, we really 
do not have the folks to do some of the things you are asking 
us to do.
    But when we say we can reimburse you and we can, if you 
need to pull somebody in on overtime, we can reimburse that for 
you, it really enhances their ability to help us.
    Senator King. Do you think that reimbursement would be far 
less expensive than having five full-time agents?
    Mr. Manger. Oh, no question.
    Senator King. You mentioned the number of threats, and I am 
not sure whether you have the historical data, but my sense is 
this is going up significantly. Is that accurate?
    Mr. Manger. Absolutely is accurate. I can tell you that 
back in 2017, we had 1,000 \1\ maybe, somewhere around 1,000, 
and last year, 9,000. It has gone up steadily and profoundly 
over the last five or six years.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ In response to Senator King, the number of threats to Members 
of Congress was cited as 1,000 in 2017. The actual number of threats 
and directions of interest toward Members of Congress was 3,939 in 
2017.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Senator King. That is very disturbing. One other area of 
questioning, and Senator Blunt touched on this, it seems like 
you are doing fairly well recruiting. Are you satisfied with 
the recruiting that you are doing? In this economy, doing any 
recruiting is difficult.
    Mr. Manger. I am very pleased.
    Senator King. You are satisfied with the quality you are 
getting?
    Mr. Manger. Yes. A couple of issues. One, there were things 
that the Congress did to help us in terms of raising our pay 
for officers and allowing us to give retention bonuses to keep 
people.
    I talked to chiefs from all over the country, and to a 
person--everybody is having trouble recruiting and getting good 
people, for a number of reasons, that want to be involved in 
the law enforcement career.
    But I firmly believe that just like after 9/11, when the 
military and police and fire had no problem recruiting because 
people wanted to serve their country, I believe that January 
6th helped us because so many of the people that have come to--
that have come on since then have said the reason that they 
were here is because they wanted to serve here because of 
January 6th.
    Senator King. Well, I appreciate that. I hope you will 
express the view of--the Chairwoman talked about this. The 
Chairwoman talked about this, the appreciation that we have for 
all the Capitol Police.
    We do not really think about it, but police, fire, and 
military, unlike almost any other job in our society, when they 
sign on the dotted line, they are committing to put their life 
on the line for us, for other people, and that is an 
extraordinary commitment. Of course, on January 6th, we saw it 
in action.
    Please convey the deep appreciation that we have for the 
work. I love to banter with your officers and see them--to see 
how they are doing. You have an extraordinary group. 
Congratulations, and thank you, Chief.
    Mr. Manger. Thank you.
    Chairwoman Klobuchar. Thank you very much, Senator King. 
Just following up on Senator King's questions and this threat 
issue, it would seem to me that kind of, if we want to be 
practical about it, as he said, we are not going to have--most 
likely not every Member is going to have around the clock 
detail unless there is an actual threat.
    There is two ways of looking at it, depending on the 
resources. One is to change the level at which that is 
considered a threat. To perhaps scoop in more people, sometimes 
for periods of time.
    The second is for events that are publicly noticed or 
things that are a bit higher risk, that those are the ones that 
we are really focused on in terms of having that. Higher risk 
to me is more like people know you are going to be there as 
opposed to some meeting that is not even publicized or 
something like that.
    That is, I just think we have to be a little more practical 
about how we look at these things. I found our local police to 
be good when we call them ahead of time, but we do not even 
think about it ahead of time sometimes about if things are out 
there or they are planned. But I think that is what we need to 
do.
    I do not know if you want to expand on that a little more.
    Mr. Manger. You have hit the nail on the head because 
oftentimes we do not know what is on your schedule or what is 
on any Member schedule unless they share it with us. When they 
share it with us and say, hey, we have got a big event back 
home expecting, you know, 500 people or whatever, we can be 
proactive.
    The United States Capitol Police will reach out to the 
local jurisdiction there, let them know about the event, and 
see what they can do to assist at the event, even if it is just 
having an officer, you know, stand in the back of the room.
    Oftentimes they are able to help us at events like that. 
The key is having the Member, the Member staff reach out to us 
and let us know. We will do the rest.
    Chairwoman Klobuchar. Okay. One of the things I mentioned 
earlier on that we are trying to work on is this bipartisan 
proposal, hopefully by the end of the year, to allow for the 
removal of Members' personal information from public websites. 
We just did it for Federal judges. Could you talk about how 
that could be helpful when it comes to home addresses?
    Mr. Manger. It would be a huge help. There is no question 
about that. As you know, we will provide staff--Members and 
staff advice. We have just finished doing the new Member 
orientation, and we talked to them about social media and 
about, you know, what to put on social media, what not to put 
on social media.
    But, you know, just to sort of help with that. But removing 
personally identifiable information of Members really would 
impact not only the Member, but it would impact their family. 
Just keeping the, you know, people's address and all this other 
personal identifiable information from being public would have 
a huge impact.
    Unfortunately, as we all know, the internet makes it very 
easy for people to find addresses and find information. 
Unfortunately, that information is used to harm folks too 
often.
    Chairwoman Klobuchar. Right. I think it is not--the 
question to ask is not, could anyone ever find it out, because 
obviously some sophisticated people could figure out where you 
live. It is more for that moment, the person that might be just 
looking to harm in a particular day or moment.
    I think many of us understand that, and that you are not 
probably limiting all your risk, but you are limiting some of 
your risk.
    Mr. Manger. Anything helps.
    Chairwoman Klobuchar. Yes. You mentioned that the 
Department is expanding its work beyond the Capitol in response 
to the threats, including opening field offices. I know 
Florida, California, I think one more, working with United 
States Attorneys' Office across the country.
    Last year, the Capitol Police referred 458 threat cases for 
prosecution, 40 resulted. I know part of this is to 
prioritize--40 resulted in prosecution. Part of this is 
increasing the number of those cases that are prosecuted. As a 
former prosecutor, I believe that has a deterrent effect as 
well.
    Talk about your efforts there. I would like to allow for 
these prosecutors to be able to do things across state lines 
and like. Talk about what is happening there.
    Mr. Manger. We have been working with our appropriations 
folks to give us the funding to not only do the residential 
assessments and work with our law enforcement partners, but 
this third leg of the stool with the prosecutions. I could not 
agree more than it has a deterrent effect. We do have special 
United States Assistant Attorneys, and they are specially 
assigned to work these threat cases.
    We are working with DOJ to allow them, and we are hopeful 
that we can get DOJ to say it is not just they work them in 
that, you know, in the San Francisco area or the, you know, the 
area in Florida, but they can go across state lines and work 
them anywhere we need to work them.
    We did--we just brought on board the third Special USA to 
work here at the Capitol in DC. That will help us for cases 
here. But it would be nice to be able to send them anywhere we 
need to send them so that we can get more of those cases 
prosecuted.
    It is--look, the FBI and the United States Attorney's 
Office are very helpful, but they have a huge caseload. For us, 
a threat against a Member of Congress is our highest priority. 
It is not always their highest priority.
    If we have our own folks to make sure these things get 
prosecuted, I think it is a big step in the right direction for 
us.
    Chairwoman Klobuchar. Good. Last question, I know you have 
made significant progress implementing each of the 
recommendations in this Committee's joint report with Homeland 
Security to address the security, planning, and response 
failures that we saw on January 6th.
    What are your ongoing priorities for security at the 
Capitol in the coming years?
    Mr. Manger. Probably the biggest issue is working with the 
Architect to the Capitol to make those infrastructure changes 
and strengthen things, to include the camera system, which we 
are redoing. We have got more posts covered here than we have 
had certainly since January 6th.
    We have increased the number of our Civil Disturbance Unit 
platoons. They are now fully equipped, fully trained with, as 
you know, better operational planning.
    Our partnership with our local agencies around the 
district, Maryland and Virginia, is really--helped us numerous 
times, whether it was the truck or convoy, the State of the 
Union, the abortion protests at the Supreme Court, we have had 
to call them in on a number of occasions.
    Again, our ability to reimburse them gives us an advantage. 
But we have always had as many cops here as we need to get the 
job done.
    Chairwoman Klobuchar. All right. Thank you. Senator Blunt.
    Senator Blunt. Well on that topic, Chief, as many people as 
you need to get the job done, when you became Chief, the 
balance did not allow that as easily as it does now, and also 
began to disrupt any planned time off and other things. We 
thought morale was a significant problem.
    What kinds of things have you done, rather than evaluate 
morale, which is hard for us to do sitting here, what have you 
done that you believe has had the most impact on officers 
understanding they are appreciated and the morale that comes 
with that?
    Mr. Manger. I think that the biggest impact we have had is 
the additional staffing. People can get days off. If they are 
scheduled to be off on a day, they can pretty much count on the 
fact that they will be off instead of being told, no, you 
cannot have that day off.
    There are fewer times when at the end of a shift, the 
Sergeant will come and say, okay, Officer Blunt, you know, you 
thought you were going home, you have got to stay here and do 
another shift because we are short on the next shift. These 
things happened all the time. I had cops telling me that they 
would go a month without getting a day off. That has changed.
    I am not saying that there are still not times when we hold 
folks over or have to change days off. But it is far fewer than 
we were doing right after January 6th. I think that made the 
biggest impact. I think the fact that we have--and I do not 
think that money ultimately is going to have a sustained impact 
on morale.
    But the fact that we have had, you know, a couple of years 
of retention bonuses, that we are now offering specialty pay to 
those who volunteer to do those specialty assignments like 
civil disturbance, I think that has made an impact where folks 
feel like, okay, you know, people are acknowledging that this 
is extra work and that this does have a little bit more hazard 
as a part of it.
    Doing things like that, that show the officers that we 
appreciate the sacrifices that they are making has made a 
difference as well. I think that lastly, you know, the fact 
that officers do feel appreciated, that does not happen by 
chance.
    I think that many of the things that this Committee has 
done, that you and Senator Klobuchar have done personally, and 
that Congress has done for the United States Capitol Police has 
sent a pretty strong message that people do care about what 
they do and do appreciate their sacrifices and do appreciate 
what they do every day.
    For any of us, if we feel like the people that we work for 
appreciate what we do, it makes a difference.
    Senator Blunt. Well, I know you worked hard on this, and I 
certainly know you are continuing, and we would encourage that. 
You have a couple of vacancies on your executive team I am 
wondering about.
    One as the Assistant Chief for Protective and Intelligence 
Operation, and the other is the Chief Administrative Officer. 
How are you doing in the effort to fill those two top jobs?
    Mr. Manger. The announcement for the Chief Administrative 
Officer went out last week. My hope is we are going to--that we 
can have that out for about a month or so. My hope is that we 
get some good candidates to choose from and we can make a 
selection for that in the next couple of months.
    The Assistant Chief for Protection and Intelligence, I have 
got an Acting in there now who--Jason Bell, who has a lot of 
experience in the protective responsibilities and 
investigations. He is doing a good job. But my intent was to 
bring and is to bring someone in from the outside.
    I want to get that, my reorganization plan, which I 
submitted to the Capitol Police Board, I want to get that 
approved and that will allow me to start filling some of those 
senior level vacancies. That--hopefully we can get to that soon 
as well. But we are--in terms of the sworn positions of the 
executive, we are managing.
    I have got a good team. I have a lot of depth on my bench 
at the higher levels, at the inspector level, the captain 
level, really, really deep benches there. We have got folks 
that are in acting positions that are doing well.
    But eventually, I have got sort of a master reorganization 
plan that I would like to get implemented, and all those senior 
level positions would be filled.
    Senator Blunt. Chair.
    Chairwoman Klobuchar. Just one or two follow ups. There 
is--we talked about that some of the changes you have made and 
how you have reached as a lot of, the goals we set, 
recommendations.
    I am still remembering the haunting words of one officer on 
the microphone when he allegedly said, does anyone have a plan? 
on January 6th. The Department has made clear progress with 
respect to operational planning, particularly by requiring a 
Department wide incident assessment plan for all large, high 
profile events.
    Can you expand briefly on what has been done to improve 
preparedness for large events?
    Mr. Manger. We have--when we plan for these events, first 
of all, we brought on an executive from the United States 
Secret Service, who is an expert in planning.
    He has really coached us and helped us change to exactly 
where I think we need to be. We do--we, it is now routine for 
us to do tabletop exercises both internally and with external 
partners to moving, you know, when we get just a few days ahead 
of a big event.
    We are involving outside agencies in a way that we never 
did before. We are training with other agencies. When these 
folks that we are asking to come in to help us, we are training 
with those agencies.
    We are also staying--we have a good, close relationship 
with the National Guard. I will tell you that if--I would only 
call the National Guard in the most dire circumstances. But we 
have, I just met with General McCandless last week just to sort 
of, you know, stay on the same page with things. We have 
actually practiced the drill of how I would go about requesting 
their assistance.
    Chairwoman Klobuchar. As you know, Senator Blunt and I 
changed the law, so it was easier to make the call.
    Mr. Manger. Yes. But we practiced how we can get that done 
very efficiently. We are doing weekly intelligence calls with 
our regional partners. All these things that we are doing now 
that were not being done before January 6th, that have--I think 
got us on the right page to make sure that there is going to be 
no failures in terms of our operational planning for an event.
    Chairwoman Klobuchar. Okay. There is more to do on how the 
Department handles intelligence, as we have talked about. Can 
you tell us how the Department has improved the sharing of 
information with the officers on the front lines, and feedback 
from officers on those improvements?
    Mr. Manger. I think you all know that we issued cell phones 
to all the officers, but we put out daily bulletins as well 
that come to their cell phones, you know, daily intelligence 
bulletins. When we are having a big event, Assistant Chief Sean 
Gallagher will go to every roll call to do an in-person 
briefing for officers to know what to expect, you know, for the 
big event coming up.
    The fact that we do after action reports on every single 
big event, we get feedback directly from the officers, and from 
officials, officers, everybody involved in the event is able to 
provide their feedback in terms of in and after action report.
    With in our incident action plans, those plans that we had 
that are typically 20-30 pages long that have every detail 
about the planning for the incident, those are widely 
circulated. Everybody knows what everybody else's 
responsibilities are.
    Everybody knows what everybody else is doing. Again, it 
helps for everybody to sort of have a bigger picture of all 
these events as we go into them.
    Chairwoman Klobuchar. One of the things I raised was 
equipment. I know you have ordered equipment. When you appeared 
before us in January, we spoke about how while all the new 
equipment had been ordered, some of the supply chain issues had 
delayed delivery. Are you now fully equipped with the type of 
equipment that you believe you need?
    Mr. Manger. We have over 1,000 officers that have all the 
equipment that they need. In fact, I do not think there is 
anybody, any uniformed officer in USB that does not have their 
equipment.
    There are still--supply chain issues are still there. But 
now the few officers that do not have all of their new 
equipment, it is a very small number, but the people that need 
them the most have them.
    I am sure within a few months we will have everybody, 100 
percent. But again, over 1,000 of the USB officers are fully 
equipped.
    Chairwoman Klobuchar. The Department, as you know, has 
taken steps to formalize a Civil Disturbance Unit to ensure 
that its officers are properly trained. How have these changes 
improved the effectiveness? What additional--can you talk a 
little bit about the onsite training and drills, and what is 
going on?
    Mr. Manger. We have--all of the--everybody in CDU, by the 
way, that we asked for volunteers, and we have got six or seven 
platoons ready. I have that written down somewhere. I will find 
it. But we have got more platoons of CDU officers that are 
trained and equipped.
    They train with other agencies. We train here as well. The 
officials, the people who are overseeing the CDU, have all been 
trained as well. We brought outside trainers in actually from a 
couple of European countries that have much more experience in 
dealing with unruly crowds than we do.
    They provided us really amazing training that we took 
advantage of. That--and we have established specialty pay for 
the Civil Disturbance Units, so that one of the big problems 
that we used to have was that when we would say we need, you 
know, 100 people to come in, you know, 100 CDU officers to come 
in for an event, not everybody would show up.
    There would be a lot of folks call in sick and that sort of 
thing. Now we have got folks that want to be there, want to do 
this. They are training with the people that they are going to 
work with.
    All of that stuff is making for better outcomes when we use 
them.
    Chairwoman Klobuchar. All right. Well, thank you. I think 
we are finished up here, but I want to thank Ranking Member 
Blunt for this productive final hearing and for all the work 
that he has done, not just on these public safety issues, but 
leading the Rules Committee, and particularly on the Electoral 
Count Act.
    He is going to end the year with strength, as has been 
noted, in getting that important bill through, the two of us, 
to update that old legislation. I am also grateful to you, 
Chief for your leadership, and the progress that you have made, 
and the openness that you have to take our ideas and listen to 
Members and work things out, and your devotion to working on 
this Member safety issue as well.
    Mr. Manger. Senator, thank you very much. I did want to say 
to Senator Blunt that you may not remember, but in my first few 
days in this job, you came over to my office, and I will tell 
you that I was pretty nervous about the fact that, you know, 
that you were coming over to talk to me.
    You brought over the Senate rules book and had my name 
embossed on it, and I thought that was very kind of you to do 
that. I am a big believer in Maya Angelou, who said, ``you 
won't remember what people said, you won't remember what people 
did, but you remember how people made you feel.''
    For someone who was nervous about coming into this job, 
when you left, I felt like that I had much more confidence that 
whatever it was going to take to get the Capitol Police where 
they needed to be, that that was going to be able to happen 
because of the talk that you and I had and the fact that I knew 
somebody in your position, with your stature, had the, you 
know, had in their heart the support for the Capitol Police 
that we needed to get things done.
    I want to thank you for giving me the confidence to do this 
job when I just had a few days here, and I appreciate your 
support throughout my tenure here. Thank you, sir.
    Senator Blunt. Thank you, Chief.
    Chairwoman Klobuchar. What a great way to end this hearing, 
because I think it is just an illustration of the kind of work 
that Senator Blunt does every day, so much of it behind the 
scenes. Chief, when you are talking about going through 
calling, if there was a crisis with the Commander of the 
National Guard, I was thinking of whatever next crisis I have 
starting, you know, January 7th.
    I will probably still call Roy Blunt to get his advice. We 
thank Roy for his service. We are going to keep the record open 
for one week. We thank you, Roy.
    Senator Blunt. Thank you. Thank you, Chief. Thank you, 
Chairwoman.
    Chairwoman Klobuchar. The hearing is adjourned.
    [Whereupon, at 4:38 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

                      APPENDIX MATERIAL SUBMITTED

                              ----------                              

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
  

                                  [all]

