
 - S. Hrg. 117-581 . ROUNDTABLE FEDRAMP REFORM: RECOMMENDATIONS TO REDUCE BURDEN, ENHANCE SECURITY, AND ADDRESS INEFFICIENCIES IN THE GOVERNMENT CLOUD AUTHORIZATION PROCESS

[Senate Hearing 117-581]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]



 

                                                        S. Hrg. 117-581
 
                       ROUNDTABLE FEDRAMP REFORM:
                   RECOMMENDATIONS TO REDUCE BURDEN,
                     ENHANCE SECURITY, AND ADDRESS
      INEFFICIENCIES IN THE GOVERNMENT CLOUD AUTHORIZATION PROCESS

=======================================================================

                                HEARING

                               before the

                              COMMITTEE ON
               HOMELAND SECURITY AND GOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
                          UNITED STATES SENATE

                    ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS


                             FIRST SESSION

                               __________

                           NOVEMBER 30, 2021

                               __________

        Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov

                       Printed for the use of the
        Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs

        COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY AND GOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
        
        
        
       [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT] 
       
       
       
                     
        
                     U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE 
       50-895PDF          WASHINGTON : 2023
        
 
 
        
        
        

                   GARY C. PETERS, Michigan, Chairman
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware           ROB PORTMAN, Ohio
MAGGIE HASSAN, New Hampshire         RON JOHNSON, Wisconsin
KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona              RAND PAUL, Kentucky
JACKY ROSEN, Nevada                  JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
ALEX PADILLA, California             MITT ROMNEY, Utah
JON OSSOFF, Georgia                  RICK SCOTT, Florida
                                     JOSH HAWLEY, Missouri

                   David M. Weinberg, Staff Director
                    Zachary I. Schram, Chief Counsel
         Christopher J. Mulkins, Director of Homeland Security
            Lena C. Chang, Director of Governmental Affairs
         Matthew T. Cornelius, Senior Professional Staff Member
                Pamela Thiessen, Minority Staff Director
       Amanda N. Neely, Minority Director of Governmental Affairs
                   Samantha Onofry, Minority Counsel
                     Laura W. Kilbride, Chief Clerk
                     Thomas J. Spino, Hearing Clerk

                            C O N T E N T S

                                 ------                                
Opening statements:
                                                                   Page
    Senator Peters...............................................     1
    Senator Portman..............................................     2
    Senator Hawley...............................................    15
Prepared statements:
    Senator Peters...............................................    25
    Senator Portman..............................................    26

                               WITNESSES
                       Tuesday, November 30, 2021

Ashley Mahan, Acting Assistant Commissioner, Technology 
  Transformation Services, General Services Administration.......     3
David Shive, Chief Information Officer, General Services 
  Administration.................................................     4
Eric Mill, Senior Advisor to the Federal Chief Information 
  Officer, Office of Management and Budget.......................     5
Anthony Fisic, Executive Director for Global Security Services, 
  OCLC...........................................................     6
Steve Kovac, Chief Compliance Officer and Head of Global 
  Government Affairs, Zscaler....................................     6
Ross Nodurft, Executive Director, Alliance for Digital Innovation     8
Jeff Stern, Chief Executive Officer, Chain Security..............     9

                     Alphabetical List of Witnesses

Fisic, Anthony:
    Testimony....................................................     6
Kovac, Steve:
    Testimony....................................................     6
    Prepared statement...........................................    33
Mahan, Ashley:
    Testimony....................................................     3
    Prepared statement...........................................    28
Mill, Eric:
    Testimony....................................................     5
Nodurft, Ross:
    Testimony....................................................     8
    Prepared statement...........................................    35
Shive, David:
    Testimony....................................................     4
    Prepared statement...........................................    30
Stern, Jeff:
    Testimony....................................................     9
    Prepared statement...........................................    44


                       ROUNDTABLE FEDRAMP REFORM:



                   RECOMMENDATIONS TO REDUCE BURDEN,



                     ENHANCE SECURITY, AND ADDRESS



      INEFFICIENCIES IN THE GOVERNMENT CLOUD AUTHORIZATION PROCESS

                              ----------                              


                       TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 30, 2021

                                     U.S. Senate,  
                           Committee on Homeland Security  
                                  and Governmental Affairs,
                                                    Washington, DC.
    The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:31 p.m., via 
Webex and in room 342, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. 
Gary C. Peters, Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
    Present: Senators Peters, Rosen, Ossoff, Portman, Scott, 
and Hawley.

            OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN PETERS\1\

    Chairman Peters. This roundtable will come to order.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ The prepared statement of Senator Peters appears in the 
Appendix on page 25.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Certainly I am pleased, and I know I speak for my committee 
Members at the Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs 
Committee (HSGAC), to have representatives from both the 
government and industry here to discuss the Federal Risk and 
Authorization Management Program (FedRAMP), as well as our 
Committee's bipartisan bill, S. 3099, which is the Federal 
Secure Cloud Improvement and Jobs Act of 2021. I want to thank 
each and every one of you for taking time to be with us here 
today to share your insights on how FedRAMP can help agencies 
adopt some innovative cloud technologies while also ensuring 
robust security for Federal data and information.
    I especially appreciate Senators Hassan, Hawley, and Daines 
for co-sponsoring the bill that is before this Committee. It is 
similar to a version that passed the House and is already 
included in the House version of the National Defense 
Authorization Act (NDAA). The bill that we have pending before 
this Committee is a comprehensive, consensus set of reforms to 
drive quicker, more secure commercial cloud capabilities in 
government, which will improve cybersecurity, empower agencies 
to deliver modern digital services to citizens, and expand 
American leadership in cloud technologies which is, of course, 
incredibly important.
    I look forward to discussing these reforms with an 
excellent group of experts. Again, thank you for being here 
today.
    I now recognize Ranking Member Portman for any opening 
comments.

            OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR PORTMAN\1\

    Senator Portman. Great. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I 
appreciate your being willing to hold this hearing today, and I 
appreciate the witnesses being here because we have some real 
expertise before us, which is important in this area because it 
is complicated.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ The prepared statement of Senator Portman appears in the 
Appendix on page 26.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    As you know, Mr. Chairman, I am not on the bill because I 
think we need to make some changes to it to make it fit better 
what I see as the potential problems in the codifying of the 
current practice. And you know, this is very important because 
this is the conduit for kind of a standard approach to 
assessing the security issues regarding cloud services, and it 
is incredibly important we get this right. I thank you for 
giving us a chance to review it today.
    Mr. Fisic, particularly, thank you for joining us all the 
way from Dublin, Ohio, from Ohio College Library Center (OCLC), 
my home State. We appreciate again all of you being here and 
providing your insights.
    The FedRAMP's ``do once, use many times'' framework has a 
lot of benefits. Once you get that security clearance, in 
effect, the reuse of authorized cloud systems has helped the 
government avoid an estimated $716 million in costs. So that is 
a good thing.
    The current program, however, has weaknesses in it, which I 
hope we will talk about today in some detail. Those weaknesses, 
I believe, have left it vulnerable to foreign-backed hackers 
targeting cloud systems. Now that would include China; it would 
include Russia. Right now we do not have sufficient safeguards 
in place to identify and prevent foreign interference in our 
cloud systems, and I believe that must change before we codify 
this program. I know a lot of people share that concern.
    This is especially important in light of FedRAMP's emphasis 
on reuse and the program's influence that goes really well 
beyond the Federal Government. The States, as an example, and 
local government often procure FedRAMP-authorized products 
because the FedRAMP label is on it. The Good Housekeeping Seal 
is on it, implying that these products and services are secure.
    Further, FedRAMP relies heavily on the security assessments 
performed by private sector, third-party assessment 
organizations (3PAO). Surprisingly, cloud service providers 
(CSP) are the ones who choose which 3PAO assessor will conduct 
the security assessment of their cloud system and pays for it. 
To me, that creates a potential conflict of interest, and we 
should talk about that openly today. We have some ideas. I know 
we have talked to the Majority about this, as to how we could 
address that issue.
    Finally, despite best efforts to improve the program, 
FedRAMP still suffers from high costs, long timelines, and 
inconsistent review processes across the agencies. As a result, 
Federal agencies have fewer cloud service offerings (CSO) to 
choose from compared to their private sector counterparts, 
hindering agencies from procuring the best service for their 
needs. As of today, as an example, there are roughly 240 
FedRAMP-authorized providers compared to the thousands 
available in the private market.
    I look forward to a productive conversation today and how 
it would address some of these inefficiencies and some of the 
burdens in the FedRAMP system and how to improve the security 
posture of the government's cloud-based systems.
    Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Chairman Peters. Thank you, Ranking Member Portman.
    I am going to introduce each of our guests one at a time. 
If you could take a couple minutes, introduce yourself and any 
thoughts that you may have, but try to be brief. We are not 
going to have the timer on, but try to just do it in a couple 
minutes because we want to get to some questions and have more 
dialog.
    We are going to first hear from Ashley Mahan, Acting 
Assistant Commissioner of the Technology Transformation 
Services (TTS) at the General Services Administration (GSA).
    Welcome.

 TESTIMONY OF ASHLEY MAHAN,\1\ ACTING ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER, 
     TECHNOLOGY TRANSFORMATION SERVICES, GENERAL SERVICES 
                         ADMINISTRATION

    Ms. Mahan. Thank you. Good afternoon, Chairman Peters, 
Ranking Member Portman, and distinguished Members of the 
Committee. I thank you for the opportunity to participate in 
this roundtable today alongside my colleague, David Shive, the 
Chief Information Officer (CIO) of GSA and a member of the 
Joint Authorization Board (JAB).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ The prepared statement of Ms. Mahan appears in the Appendix on 
page 28.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    I am Ashley Mahan, the Acting Assistant Commissioner of the 
Technology Transformation Services, Office of Solutions within 
the General Services Administration. I have spent most of my 
career dedicated to cybersecurity and mitigating risks to the 
security of Federal data. I have worn several hats, from 
writing System Security Plans (SSP), preparing for security 
audits, and serving as an Agency Information Systems Security 
Manager (ISSM) to leading FedRAMP.
    I have also had a chance to work with the many different 
types of professionals involved in the end-to-end process, from 
cloud architects, incident responders, auditors and engineers 
to acquisition specialists and c-suite executives. They are 
always top of mind when we define improvements and develop the 
strategy for FedRAMP.
    The program's success is largely based on our partnerships. 
We have listened to our partners, and they have been 
instrumental in how we have evolved and run the program today. 
We are about to celebrate our 10-year anniversary of FedRAMP, 
and along the way we have made steady growth and the pace at 
which companies get products FedRAMP-authorized has improved. 
In the last three years, we have more than doubled the number 
of authorizations from 100 to 240 as well as more than tripled 
the number of reuses of FedRAMP-authorized cloud products. The 
program's growth has even greater urgency given the continued 
demand for secure cloud technology and the need to work 
remotely.
    As I look ahead to the future of FedRAMP, automation and 
modernizing our processes will be the focus of the program 
strategy. Meaningful and lasting change will only happen with 
continued collaboration with our government and industry 
partners. We will continue to leverage the insights of the 
cybersecurity community in order to solicit feedback as we 
continue to implement automation and modernize FedRAMP.
    Our work is never done in this dynamic space. FedRAMP is 
committed to continuous improvement and transparency, driving 
the need to cultivate strong working relationships across 
industry and the Federal Government community in support of 
securing cloud technology. Thank you.
    Chairman Peters. Thank you.
    Next we are going to hear from David Shive, Chief 
Information Officer at the General Services Administration and 
a member of the FedRAMP Joint Authorization Board.
    Welcome.

TESTIMONY OF DAVID SHIVE,\1\ CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER, GENERAL 
                    SERVICES ADMINISTRATION

    Mr. Shive. Thank you. I may need to speak loudly. It seems 
this is not working.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ The prepared statement of Mr. Shive appears in the Appendix on 
page 30.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Chairman Peters, Ranking Member Portman, and Members of the 
Committee. My name is David Shive, and I am the Chief 
Information Officer at the General Services Administration as 
well as one of three Joint Authorization Board members for 
FedRAMP. It is an honor to be here today and a privilege to 
work alongside my colleague, Ashley Mahan, to discuss the 
FedRAMP program. I welcome the opportunity to share my 
organization's experiences related to FedRAMP as well as my 
experience as a JAB member.
    The mission of GSA is to deliver the best value in real 
estate acquisition and technology services to government and to 
the American people. Our priorities are to deliver better value 
and savings, serve our partners, expand opportunities for small 
business, and make government more sustainable and be a leader 
in innovation. In support of that and as it relates to the 
Committee's objectives today, one of my organization's key 
goals in supporting GSA's mission is to deliver technology that 
provides a secure environment for doing business while ensuring 
that both information technology (IT) and business continue to 
run efficiently.
    My role as a Joint Authorization Board member, along with 
the Department of Defense (DOD) and the Department of Homeland 
Security (DHS) CIOs, signoff of provisional authorizations to 
operate (P-ATO) based on FedRAMP packages provided by cloud 
service providers, assessed by FedRAMP third-party assessment 
organizations, and reviewed and validated by FedRAMP JAB 
technical representatives from GSA, DHS, and DOD. Separately, 
my organization with GSA, GSAIT, facilitates FedRAMP agency 
authorizations for cloud service provider offerings where GSA 
has a business need.
    These roles allow me to have an intimate knowledge of, and 
experience with, the FedRAMP program, and I look forward to 
sharing my insights with you today. Thank you for allowing me 
the opportunity to contribute to this important topic.
    Chairman Peters. Thank you.
    Next we are going to hear from Eric Mill, Senior Advisor to 
the Federal Chief Information Officer at the Office of 
Management and Budget (OMB).
    Welcome.

  TESTIMONY OF ERIC MILL, SENIOR ADVISOR TO THE FEDERAL CHIEF 
      INFORMATION OFFICER, OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET

    Mr. Mill. Thank you. Chairman Peters, Ranking Member 
Portman, other distinguished Members of the Committee, good 
afternoon. Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you 
today about the FedRAMP program.
    My name is Eric Mill. I serve in the Biden-Harris 
administration at the Office of Management and Budget as a 
Senior Advisor to the Federal Chief Information Officer, Clare 
Martorana. I work closely with her as well as with the Federal 
Chief Information Security Officer, Chris DeRusha, to 
accelerate the modernization of Federal technology and 
cybersecurity.
    I have also in the past been a civil servant with the 
General Services Administration under two previous 
administrations as a member of the senior leadership team for 
the Technology Transformation Services. While I was there, I 
coordinated closely with the GSA CIO to authorize modern cloud 
tools for use in GSA. I was also the authorizing official (AO) 
at GSA for a large governmentwide service that was working 
toward the FedRAMP authorization. In my engineering days, I 
personally built and deployed a few small government services 
to the cloud myself.
    This administration recognizes the value and potential of 
the FedRAMP program to bring the best of the commercial cloud 
into government and to meaningfully raise the bar for Federal 
cybersecurity in the modern era and just to generally save time 
and money for both the government and for the private sector. 
We are relying on FedRAMP to help implement the President's 
Executive Order (EO) on cybersecurity, to support agencies as 
they migrate to a Zero Trust architecture, and generally to 
accelerate the adoption of modern cloud tools that improve 
agency efficiency and, ultimately, the public's experience with 
their government.
    OMB is committed to continuing to work with you and 
Congress on legislation to bolster the FedRAMP program. We have 
been providing feedback to the Senate Homeland Security and 
Governmental Affairs Committee throughout the year to 
strengthen the proposed legislation based on OMB's and GSA's 
experience with the program and this administration's vision 
for Federal cybersecurity.
    Thank you again for the opportunity to speak with you this 
afternoon. I am looking forward to the discussion.
    Chairman Peters. Thank you.
    Next we will hear from Anthony Fisic, Executive Director 
for Global Security Services at OCLC.
    Welcome.

   TESTIMONY OF ANTHONY FISIC, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR FOR GLOBAL 
                    SECURITY SERVICES, OCLC

    Mr. Fisic. Thank you, Senator Peters, Ranking Member 
Portman. I am really happy to be here today.
    As you mentioned, I am Anthony Fisic, Executive Director 
for Global Security at OCLC, and I have tremendous experience 
as a retired military officer working within a Federal 
environment, in the private public sector, in the global 
Software as a Service (SaaS) organization, working global 
compliance frameworks. We have great experience working with 
FedRAMP, been working with FedRAMP since 2017, and we currently 
are credited as a FedRAMP-authorized agency. I hope to share 
some of that insight with the team.
    We are a global not-for-profit serving the library services 
community, and there are particular challenges that we face 
that many larger organizations may not face. I am happy to work 
with you guys today to discuss some of that. Thank you.
    Chairman Peters. Great. Thank you.
    Next we will hear from Steve Kovac, who is Chief Compliance 
Officer and Head of Global Government Affairs at Zscaler.

TESTIMONY OF STEVE KOVAC,\1\ CHIEF COMPLIANCE OFFICER AND HEAD 
             OF GLOBAL GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS, ZSCALER

    Mr. Kovac. Thank you, Chairman Peters and Ranking Member 
Portman and the Committee, for holding this roundtable on 
FedRAMP reform. An honor to be with these wonderful people 
around the table, many I have known for many years, and I look 
forward to this roundtable to be very open and interactive.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ The prepared statement of Mr. Kovac appears in the Appendix on 
page 33.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    As you said, my name is Stephen Kovac. I am the Chief 
Compliance Officer at Zscaler. I am here because I have a long 
history with FedRAMP and firsthand experience with the 
importance of FedRAMP to helping the Federal Government secure 
its systems as well as their networks and the challenges the 
programs have faced.
    I have been involved with FedRAMP since the beginning. In 
fact, I was involved in FedRAMP before it was FedRAMP and when 
it was the blanket purchase agreement. I think back in those 
days it was the second one to be approved under the VPA. Since 
then, I have taken multiple systems through FedRAMP, both very 
small systems for moderate agencies to very large systems, at 
the HyperScope to JAB high, and multiple in between.
    I have the knowledge of what many of the things you spoke 
of, Chairman and Ranking Member Portman, Senator Portman, in 
your opening statements, and I look forward to addressing those 
with you.
    A little about Zscaler. We are very much like FedRAMP. We 
were born and bred in the cloud. FedRAMP was built for the 
cloud. We have the same mission, which is to make cloud safe 
for everybody, our company, as FedRAMP does for the government. 
We believe heavily in the FedRAMP program, and Zscaler's whole 
mission is around securing cloud and finding the best ways to 
do it and adapt as adaptions are needed.
    To give you an example of what we do today, we run what we 
call our Zero Trust Exchange, which is built with two FedRAMP 
platforms underneath it, which is the base infrastructure to 
support 200 billion transactions a day run across our 
platforms. Our platforms are both high and moderate, and by the 
end of 2022 we will have two high JABs and two moderate 
agencies for our platforms.
    We also have IL5 for one of our platforms, and we are IL5-
in-process on our other platforms. Our goal will be to have IL5 
by the end of 2022 as well across our platforms.
    A little bit more about how Zscaler feels and myself feel. 
We obviously support S. 3099. We believe it is a very important 
legislation to move forward, and we believe that it is critical 
for the program itself and it will drive continuous 
improvements to the program while helping ensure Federal 
agencies have access to cybersecurity tools needed to protect 
them from today's ever evolving cyberthreats.
    I assure you we, on a daily basis, correct over 200,000 
updates for new cyberattacks that we find around the globe. So 
that gives you an idea of the scope of what is out there 
attacking us and why FedRAMP is so important.
    It is also very important that we talk about the 
reciprocity with FedRAMP and the reuse, I mean, today. I am 
sure actually Dave will be talking about this. But you know, we 
talked about 241 agencies, but there is over 2,041 reuses of 
FedRAMP. So reciprocity is being done, and we do it today.
    Reciprocity should be viewed in two ways. No. 1 is 
agencies' reciprocity of our FedRAMP platforms, but there is 
also reciprocities to the CSPs. Our CSPs are using our products 
to get their FedRAMP. This reciprocity creates a very good 
economy of scale to address cost issues when you can buy 
prepackaged services, which we will talk about later on today.
    The ``serve once, use many'' is critical, and I think 
reciprocity is going to go for FedRAMP, but FedRAMP reciprocity 
is now extended to StateRAMP, which is the new program 
launched, I am sure you all are aware, as well as reciprocity 
is being heavily discussed with the CMMC program.
    Like I said, we will address costs later, but one thing let 
me just say. When you consider FedRAMP and its time and cost, I 
ask that we take time today to look at, policy versus fact, 
experience versus inexperience, and really get down to the meat 
of why these sometimes take so long and why sometimes they are 
expensive and what part of that is on the CSP and what part of 
that is on the program. I think there is improvement in both 
areas, but there has definitely been drastic improvement since 
I have been a part of this program for over 10 years.
    I am honored to be here and participate in today's 
roundtable, and I will help any way I can. Thank you.
    Chairman Peters. Thank you.
    Next we are going to hear from Ross Nodurft, Executive 
Director at the Alliance for Digital Innovation (ADI).

TESTIMONY OF ROSS NODURFT,\1\ EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, ALLIANCE FOR 
                       DIGITAL INNOVATION

    Mr. Nodurft. Thank you, Chairman Peters and Ranking Member 
Portman and the Members of the Committee, for holding this 
roundtable on FedRAMP reform.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ The prepared statement of Mr. Nodurft appears in the Appendix 
on page 35.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    My name is Ross Nodurft. I am the Executive Director for 
the Alliance for Digital Innovation. It is a coalition of 
innovative commercial companies whose mission it is to bring IT 
modernization and emerging technologies into government. ADI 
engages with policymakers and thought leaders to break down 
bureaucratic, institutional, and cultural barriers to change 
and enable government to access modern technology that can 
truly empower digital government.
    ADI focuses on four key areas in our advocacy efforts: 
accelerating technology modernization in government; enabling 
acquisition policies that facilitate greater access to, and use 
of, innovation technologies; promoting cybersecurity 
initiatives to better protect the public and private sectors; 
and improving the Federal Government's technology workforce. 
Each of these areas must work closely with each other to allow 
for government mission owners and technology providers to 
partner with industry to build a modern digital government.
    ADI's members include some of the leading technology and 
professional service providers in the public sector today, many 
of which have gone through the FedRAMP accreditation process or 
are working to achieve FedRAMP accreditation right now. These 
technologies underpin the Federal Government's modernization 
efforts and provide the backbone for many agencies' Zero Trust 
architectures.
    Given our areas of focus, ADI applauds the work that 
Congress, the Members of this Committee have done to evaluate 
and craft legislation that can accelerate some of the changes 
needed to enable secure access to modern, emerging 
technologies. S. 3099, the Federal Security Cloud Improvement 
and Jobs Act of 2022, and its House companion, if enacted, 
would provide stability around the FedRAMP accreditation 
process and authorize resources needed to drive many of the 
reforms called for by the Government Accountability Office 
(GAO) and the Inspector General (IG) of the General Services 
Administration.
    Over the last two years, ADI has expressed support for the 
codification of FedRAMP, and more specifically, ADI has stated 
and maintains its support for the authorization of additional 
and sustained resources to increase the number of FedRAMP 
authorizations, additional and meaningful collaboration with 
industry, the reuse and reciprocity of FedRAMP accreditations 
across the Federal Government, adoption of automation 
throughout the FedRAMP process, and creating market certainty 
through codification that gives innovative companies that are 
seeking access to the Federal market that assurance that they 
need.
    I look forward to discussing these topics further and look 
forward to discussing it with my colleagues here. Thank you 
very much.
    Chairman Peters. Thank you.
    Our last participant is joining us via Webex, and that is 
Jeff Stern, Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of Chain Security.

  TESTIMONY OF JEFF STERN,\1\ CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, CHAIN 
                            SECURITY

    Mr. Stern. Thank you very much. Good afternoon. I am Jeff 
Stern. I am the CEO of Chain Security. I first want to thank 
Chairman Peters and Ranking Member Portman and the Committee 
for inviting me to participate in today's roundtable.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ The prepared statement of Mr. Stern appears in the Appendix on 
page 44.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Chain Security is a Reston, Virginia-based consulting 
engineering firm, and we are engaged in two related areas of 
work. First is securing the supply chains of U.S. commercial 
high-tech companies, typically Silicon Valley companies, from 
interference by foreign parties. The second area of our work is 
related, and that is supporting the compliance of companies 
that are regulated by the Defense Counterintelligence and 
Security Agency (DCSA), or the Committee on Foreign Investment 
in the United States (CFIUS).
    Our consulting practice is informed by the unique 
combination of skills and backgrounds of our team. Our 
technology team includes members who have deep commercial 
product development and delivery experience in Silicon Valley. 
The company includes team members who have recent and deep 
experience in U.S. Government security practices and policies. 
We have extensive government security experience from 
organizations such as the CFIUS office, DHS, the Federal 
Communications Commission (FCC), and the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation (FBI). We include team members with recent 
experience at DHS' Cybersecurity Infrastructure Security Agency 
(CISA).
    Most of our CFIUS and DCSA-related work is focused on the 
development and implementation of national security mitigations 
that the U.S. Government has required of our clients. In 
addition to that work, I am personally engaged in the graybeard 
program at DOD as part of the CFIUS investigation team for 
foreign technology companies on behalf of DOD CFIUS office.
    The FedRAMP supply chain security information we have 
provided, and in the past we have spoken to Ms. Mahan about 
some observations we have made in FedRAMP supply chain 
security, but that work was developed in 2019 and 2020. It is 
possible that since then GSA has implemented or addressed some 
of the observations we have made in the past.
    I will tell you FedRAMP is very important to our company 
because for our private clients, who are mitigating national 
security risk, we intend to move them into FedRAMP services in 
order to comply with their various national security 
agreements. We consider FedRAMP absolutely essential to the 
success of our clients who have to comply with government rules 
and regulations. Thank you.
    Chairman Peters. Thank you. I am going to just open up with 
a couple of kind of foundational questions for the Committee 
here and then move to my colleagues to ask their questions.
    The first question will be to our government witnesses. Ms. 
Mahan, I will start with you, and then Mr. Shive and then Mr. 
Mill. Can each of you just briefly describe your roles in 
administering the program and how you believe Congress can help 
mature and improve the implementation of FedRAMP cloud security 
and adoption goals? Ms. Mahan.
    Ms. Mahan. Hi. Thank you, Chairman, for that question. In 
terms of how can Congress help, I think with the pending 
legislation that we have reviewed there are several aspects to 
the program in terms of increase reuse, increase agency 
participation in the program, as well as being able to usher in 
more cloud products through the authorization process, to give 
agencies more technology to choose from.
    Finally also, feedback is very important for the program. I 
am a big believer in listening to our customers and taking that 
feedback to drive meaningful change across the program. So 
having a formal feedback loop, if you will, to receive feedback 
regularly, early, and often from our industry partners as well 
as government agencies will really help drive the program to be 
more effective in the future. Thank you.
    Chairman Peters. All right, Mr. Shive.
    Mr. Shive. Great. Thanks for the question. I have a formal 
role and an informal role supporting the FedRAMP program.
    The formal role is I am one of the Joint Authorization 
Board members along with the DOD and DHS CIOs. Reporting to me 
is a team. I do not do all the work myself. There is a 
technical representative that is the primary GSA focus for 
assessing the technical components of packages that we are 
reviewing, the cybersecurity of the cloud service providers 
that are applying to the program. My CISO leads the team that 
does the evaluation of the packages and is filled with Federal 
employees and contract augmentation staff employees. I sit on 
top of that entire organization, the machine that is doing one-
third of the assessment work on the packages.
    Informally, I am the CIO of a Federal agency. I am a 
consumer of the product that FedRAMP produces, and I have 
input. Ms. Mahan said that she solicits the feedback from the 
stakeholders who are interested in the program, and I am one of 
those voices that is speaking to her and speaking with cloud 
service providers, looking for ways to optimize and make more 
efficient the overall FedRAMP program.
    Chairman Peters. Any suggestions for Congress, how we can 
improve implementation?
    Mr. Shive. Yes. I am proud to be associated with the 
FedRAMP program in that over its 10-year lifespan they have 
constantly iterated and tried to be relevant, not only with 
cybersecurity risk at the time, but compliance and risk 
management of the time. The team has done a good job of growing 
and shifting with the emerging cybersecurity threat and with 
the needs of the cloud service providers.
    What I would say is as you are crafting and thinking about 
legislation that you create time and space for the program to 
be able to do that, to continue to iterate over time, be less 
prescriptive, be more allowing, knowing that we cannot fully 
assess what the cybersecurity threat in the future is going to 
look like and that the team needs to have that agility built in 
through any legislation that would be left.
    Chairman Peters. Very good. Same question to you, Mr. Mill.
    Mr. Mill. Yes. The Office of Management and Budget has a 
number of roles with FedRAMP. The FedRAMP program itself is 
currently ultimately a creation of the Office of Management and 
Budget, and its authority comes from policy that OMB has set 
out.
    The work being done on legislation to support FedRAMP would 
give the program quite a bit more certainty and stability, and 
so that is something that we are supportive and interested in 
continuing to work with you on. Our office oversees the 
development of cloud security and security policies generally 
in the Federal Government and is ultimately responsible for 
setting the tone as well.
    One of the things that I think is really resonant with some 
of the other comments that you have heard here from industry 
and others today is really wanting to support a truly robust 
use of commercial cloud services, big and small, in the Federal 
Government. The Federal Government does not have to always be a 
late adopter, and sometimes it is more risky to be a late 
adopter, and the FedRAMP shows a lot of promise in being able 
to enable that.
    So that is what I would answer for that.
    Chairman Peters. Mr. Kovac, your company has several 
products that have been FedRAMP-authorized, as you mentioned in 
your opening comments, as well as a variety of security levels. 
So that is pretty extensive experience that you have 
representing a cloud service provider in the Federal 
marketplace.
    I am interested if you could discuss how this program has 
evolved over the years that you have been engaged in it and 
what additional changes you would like to see the GSA and OMB 
and other agencies make to reduce costs, to avoid duplication, 
and to enhance effective security in the process.
    Mr. Kovac. Thank you for the question, Chairman. It is a 
great question. Everybody learns over a period of 10 years, 
right? We are all going to get better. In the initial years, in 
the initial times, FedRAMP was onerous in many of the 
processes. It was getting its feet under itself, a lot of back 
and forth, not a lot of collaboration in the early years. It 
was you send your document in and your document came back. 
Security policy was changing, and it was changing in the middle 
of an authorization, and therefore, you would have one policy 
and all of a sudden you would have to go back and change it 
again.
    What you have seen through a tremendous amount of work and 
effort from the FedRAMP office is really getting that process 
very automated, very collaborative, and I think it has allowed 
us to be much more nimble in how we approach a FedRAMP 
authorization.
    You talk about many of them, I mean, I have done an 
authorization that took four years back in the early days. I 
bragged that obviously here that we have the record of two and 
half months for a FedRAMP JAB high. There is for a very large 
system. Obviously there is improvement. The improvement is 
there.
    It has matured over the years, and I think it has matured 
by, No. 1, obviously the natural maturation of any process 
throughout the years, but I think also, they have been able to 
really learn from the more and more patches that have come 
through. They have learned, what to look for, what are the 
things that can trip up an agency, what are the things that can 
trip up a CSP, what are the things that trip up an agency.
    I assure you anybody that has ever sat down in a room and 
done a boundary discussion with the FedRAMP office you will 
learn that it is a very strict process. That process has gotten 
stricter over the years. It has not gotten easier, and yet, we 
have accelerated the number of FedRAMP authorizations. So 
something is working, right?
    Yes, you talk about 241 authorizations equated out to 2,800 
reuses comes out to something like 10 reuses by 77 agencies. If 
you equate that back to every one of those agencies having to 
do an Authorization to Operate (ATO) on their own without 
FedRAMP, we would be nowhere near where we are.
    We have the Open Security Controls Assessment Language 
(OSCAL) now is coming out, which is automation of the SSP 
process. I think what you are seeing is just the natural growth 
and the market accepting and knowing how to get through the 
process.
    There is a group of us that all work together, my peers in 
the industry, that we know how to do the process. Then there 
are the people that come through that just do not know how to 
do it. FedRAMP has made it much easier for them to get through 
it.
    I blew all over the board with my answer, but I was trying 
to get across the fact that there is a lot of factors here, but 
the most important is the enhancements they have made to just 
the knowledge base and the collaboration. It is just phenomenal 
these days.
    Chairman Peters. That is great. I will have more questions, 
but I want to turn it over to Ranking Member Portman. I know he 
has a number of questions.
    Senator Portman. Great. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to 
leave time for Mr. Hawley to also ask some questions before he 
has to take off because I know he is busy. I will be as brief 
as I can, but I have a lot of questions, as you know.
    I am for codifying. I am for standardization. I am for more 
certainty and predictability going forward. I think it is a 
good idea. FedRAMP, in practice, I think is a good idea and, it 
is essential. Yet, the security issue just bothers me. I want 
to be sure we fully vet this. Foreign interference in 
particular is a deep concern of mine, and I think it is of 
others as well.
    Second, I want to talk about potential conflicts of 
interest with the assessment process. I do not know why we have 
the companies that are getting assessed, choose their assessor 
and then pay for the assessor. It seems to me that creates at 
least an appearance of a conflict.
    Then third is just the cost and timing issue. You have 
addressed that maybe things are getting better, but you know, 
we need to allow the service providers to be able to have a 
sense of how much time this is going to take and, like any 
regulatory process, how much it is going to cost to make sure 
that we are getting the very best cloud services. That is the 
whole idea here, right, is the Federal Government has the gold 
standard.
    On the first issue, which is the foreign interference, this 
Committee has been very active on this issue. The Safeguarding 
American Innovation Act came out of this Committee. Senator 
Hawley has been really taking the lead in this Congress to 
protect the government from data from China through legislation 
that would ban TikTok, as an example, on government devices. 
Other Senators have similarly been very involved, on both sides 
of the aisle. I know we care about it a lot, and this Committee 
tends to be a place where a lot of that happens.
    My concern is that the source of some of this code that we 
are relying on in the Federal Government may well be from 
foreign entities and specifically engineers in China, and I 
just want to make sure I understand why we would want to permit 
that.
    Then the second issue that I have identified is that we do 
not have to keep up with the disclosures. You make an initial 
disclosure saying I am owned by this company from the United 
Kingdom (U.K.), this company from the United States or 
whatever. But then, as an example, not to just focus on China, 
but if China becomes an owner, there is no requirement to 
update that disclosure, as I understand it. To me that seems 
like an obvious problem that ought to be addressed in this 
legislation. If we are going to codify this thing, let us be 
sure that we are not putting ourselves in that position.
    Mr. Stern, turning to you, you are the one that is not 
here, so you are easy to turn to. Can you talk a little about 
that? Your observations on supply chain risk and foreign 
interference as it relates to FedRAMP.
    Mr. Stern. Sure. Thank you, Senator Portman. I am going to 
talk about three things. The first is the system security plan 
and the fact that FedRAMP authorization of the SSP has not 
seemed to look or assess the providence of the software and the 
service offering. As you mentioned, the code could all be 
developed in China; yet, there is no disclosure requirements 
here.
    Our recommendation around that has been that at least--you 
may not be able to stop this because the global supply chain, 
but at the very least, the buyer or user at DOD or at DHS or 
wherever should be able to know how much of the code was 
written overseas and what percentage was written overseas. We 
have offered up some metrics as recommendations in the past 
about how to sort of what I will call the truth in advertising 
or truth in disclosure, not only in the authorization process 
but also for the purchaser who is going to use the service.
    The second is that the system security boundary for 
authorization seems to be defined too narrowly. We have seen 
cases where, for example, even though your customer care people 
are here in the United States, no one is looking at the 
customer care system itself and who is maintaining it and what 
engineers overseas, particularly in a country like China, can 
have access to the entire customer care information, including 
the personal identifiable information (PII), of U.S. Government 
users, the IP addresses, their e-mail addresses, their names, 
phone number, et cetera.
    The third is we observed a case where one of the 3PAO 
organizations had already been through a CFIUS process where 
CFIUS and DCSA, as a result of a foreign acquisition of the 
company, required establishment of a mitigated subsidiary to 
hold a security clearance; yet, it was not the mitigated sub 
who continued to be the 3PAO. It was the foreign, unmitigated 
parent of the mitigated sub who continued as the PAO.
    There is a thing called an SF-328. It is a form which 
declares how much foreign ownership you have. We believe every 
3PAO has to fill out an SF-328 both at change of ownership but 
annually. New 328s, which are easy to fill out, should be filed 
by every 3PAO.
    Senator Portman. Great. Thank you. By the way, it was the 
PAOs that I was referring to in terms of that ownership 
requirement and having to update it, and it seems to me that is 
a relatively easy fix.
    Mr. Stern. Very easy.
    Senator Portman. Maybe the first one is a little bit 
harder. We have recommended some language that just gives the 
GSA the authority, and the requirement really, to review ``the 
sufficiency of underlying standards and requirements to 
identify and assess the providence of the software in cloud 
services and products in the FedRAMP program.'' So that would 
allow GSA to assist National Institute for Standards and 
Technology (NIST) in developing and improving the standards 
regarding foreign interference.
    Ms. Mahan in particular, do you have concerns with that 
kind of language? Do you think that does that not go far 
enough, or does it go too far? What do you think about stopping 
this concern we have about foreign interference?
    Ms. Mahan. Thank you, Senator. I just wanted to thank Chain 
Security and Mr. Stern as we met, as he alluded to, in 2020, 
where he provided some of these recommendations. We had a good 
conversation discussing the recommendations he brought up today 
as well as we took the due diligence and steps to research 
those out. There were some things that we were working on 
already in progress and things that we implemented based on his 
recommendations and research.
    I do think that this is an area that is continuing to 
evolve daily, and as from a program standpoint, we are 
committed to evolve with it. In terms of geolocation for the 
government's most sensitive, unclassified data, we call that 
part of our high workloads. There are geolocation restrictions 
to U.S. and territories with U.S. jurisdiction, as well as we 
are continuing to work with NIST and with future updates to 
provide additional security controls when it does come to 
supply chain.
    But again, we are absolutely committed to be working with 
the Committee, as well as different government agencies and 
industry, to ensure that the program continues to evolve as 
these threats are continuing to evolve as well.
    Senator Portman. OK. I want to let my colleague, Mr. 
Hawley, jump in here, but let me just say--and we will get back 
into the potential conflict of interest issue I have and also 
the cost and timing and the compliance burdens. But with regard 
to this issue, I mean, from what you are saying, it sounds like 
you agree with Mr. Stern generally and you agree with a 
solution that gives you all not just the authority but the 
requirement to do that important compliance to make sure that 
we are not seeing foreign interference.
    Ms. Mahan. Absolutely. This is a critical area, a focus 
area, and we are committed to evolve and working with our 
industry and agency partners on this.
    Senator Portman. OK.
    Ms. Mahan. Yes.
    Chairman Peters. Before Senator Hawley, we are working on 
changing that language right now. I think these are very good, 
constructive concerns that you have raised that we are going to 
make sure is in the language going forward. Thank you.
    Senator Hawley.

              OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR HAWLEY

    Senator Hawley. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want 
to follow up on this line of questioning. Just so that I 
understand, Ms. Mahan, you think that Senator Portman's--the 
language that he is talking about, you support that? You think 
that that would go some way toward addressing the software 
providence issue?
    Ms. Mahan. I would have to look at the specific language, 
but again, supply chain security is of utmost importance and 
concern at this time. I would be more than happy to take that 
particular language, continue providing technical assistance 
that we have done on prior versions of the pending legislation, 
and you know, provide any particular thoughts regarding the 
specific language.
    Senator Hawley. Are there other measures, other reforms, 
other amendment language, frankly, that you or other Members 
who are here, other witnesses who are here, would suggest to 
get at this issue of software providence? I think Senator 
Portman has raised an important issue. I share his concerns.
    I am just curious. Beyond what he has proposed in terms of 
allowing FedRAMP to work with NIST in developing standards, are 
there other measures that you or others might put forward for 
our consideration as we work on this legislation? Go ahead, Mr. 
Shive. You are sort of nodding. So the old professor in me will 
take that as you want to comment.
    Mr. Shive. I think this goes back to one of my opening 
statements. There is a certain advantage in being less 
prescriptive in legislation. The risk changes. You look at the 
risk associated with cybersecurity. It has changed and morphed 
over time, and the program has changed and morphed right along 
with it. Mr. Kovac talked about how the way that things are 
done, that are assessed now, is more lightweight, easier, even 
though the overall risk profile has gotten profoundly more 
complex and does so every single day.
    Supply chain is going to be the same exact way. The program 
has been able to, under current less prescriptive legislation, 
to be able to shift, change, morph, mature, and become stronger 
in that environment. We suspect that under the supply chain 
risk that that same less prescriptive model would be most 
effective because we cannot anticipate what that threat is 
going to look like in the future and we run the risk of tying 
our hands if we are too prescriptive.
    Senator Hawley. Fair enough. Do others have thoughts? Yes, 
Mr. Kovac, go ahead.
    Mr. Kovac. Yes. Thank you, Senator. I look at this as an 
interesting question because if you look at the SA controls 
that currently exist in FedRAMP there is absolutely sufficient 
controls for any offshore development to know what is being 
done before you load it into your boundary. The controls we 
must meet, the testing we must do to that code disclose where 
that code has come from. These are all today part of the 
FedRAMP authorization process.
    There is also the CISA directive on working with restricted 
countries, right? So immediately, when CISA came out with their 
leadership, the next day, within hours, we had 24 hours to 
respond back to FedRAMP that we were not doing business with 
these restricted countries.
    This is an issue that is growing. But if we are to say we 
cannot develop software outside of the United States, let me 
assure you a lot of companies, including us, are going to have 
a lot of problems because some of the best work in the world is 
done in countries like India and other places that are partners 
of ours.
    As long as these SA controls are followed there is honesty, 
and the 3PAOs are expected to do these, I fully believe they 
do, and we can have that discussion, Senator--I think that the 
SA controls today are sufficient.
    I was working with a company where we built a FedRAMP 
moderate cloud, and we were going to sell it to BT Group. The 
first thing we had to do was contact the FedRAMP office, and we 
had to apply for permission to do that because they were 
foreign-owned. Obviously, they were BT United States, but they 
were a Foreign Ownership, Control or Influence (FOCI). 
Immediately, that came in, and we had meetings with them, 
discussion and full disclosure.
    Unless it was done, unethically, I find it hard to believe 
that someone owning a FedRAMP cloud could just sell it off. But 
you know, things could happen. Today, there are proper 
controls, and as long as you have an ethical group, there is 
coverage there.
    One last thing I did want to address on Mr. Stern's 
comments was around the boundaries. The boundaries is a very 
interesting discussion because I am a firm believer all U.S. 
citizen cloud data is anonymized.
    When we build clouds, that go to the IL5 level, the IL6 
level--we start with that plan. We go through moderate, high in 
other ways, but that is the plan. Many cloud planners do not do 
that, right? They are building just to moderate to meet their 
current market. But either way, there is still the idea of when 
you talk about support systems that is customer data. That is 
metadata. That is PII. If it has that, it is required to be in 
the boundary. That is a requirement of FedRAMP.
    If there are companies that are not putting this data 
inside the boundary, then you know, we need to have language or 
a process to figure out why that is happening because the 
controls are there. You should not be able to do that.
    If you want to extend this boundary and say everything 
should be in the boundary, you are not going to have a FedRAMP 
program because where does it stop, right? At what point do I 
have to put my HVAC system in the boundary that powers electric 
in my building. At some point you have to draw a line. And 
where you draw that line is metadata, PII, right? That is 
exactly the things we spoke about. The government PII that, IP 
addresses, Social Security numbers, phone numbers. Two things 
that you could tie back to a person to create PII.
    I think, yes, the boundary is very tight here and unless 
you are having a 3PAO that does not understand the boundary 
then you should not be able to have a control system with 
metadata outside the boundary. That is a requirement.
    The last part was, just this summer we worked with 
FedRAMP--well, Zscaler did--because FedRAMP high we firmly 
believe should not be processed outside the United States. It 
is the most U.S. sovereign-owned or--I forget how we worded it. 
But to me, we are passionate about this. Moderate boundaries, I 
think that is up for an agency to decide. But when you are 
talking FedRAMP high, that is critical data that should be 
processed on U.S. soil. Again, that is a requirement of an SSP.
    I think these things are there. Tightening language in the 
bill in any way we can I would support. But the good news is 
the foot--the benchmarks are there today.
    Senator Hawley. You can go ahead.
    Mr. Nodurft. Senator Hawley, thank you. First of all, thank 
you for your co-sponsorship of the bill. I think it is 
wonderful.
    I do want to call out one particular thing is as you are 
looking at language, making sure that there is not divergent 
areas within government who are developing different ways of 
addressing this particular risk. In other words, we have things 
that are evolving in NIST right now from the cybersecurity EO 
around supply chain security risk. To have something come out 
that is a guidance or guidelines that agencies are then passing 
on to their IT technical providers and cloud service companies 
and then to turn and have FedRAMP have additional authority to 
do something else would be problematic for a lot of the 
companies. So making sure that those are aligned in whatever 
language we do is extremely important as well.
    Senator Hawley. Very good. That is very helpful.
    Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Absolutely. Mr. Stern, do you have a view on this? Do we 
still have Mr. Stern? There we go.
    Mr. Stern, do you have a view? Back to the question of in 
addition to what Senator--the language Senator Portman has 
proposed that we have been discussing, do you have a view on 
other affirmative steps that might be taken to address the 
software providence issue or the other related issues that we 
have just been talking about, from a security perspective?
    Mr. Stern. Yes, Senator Hawley. Can you hear me?
    Senator Hawley. Yes, I can.
    Mr. Stern. Perfect. Thank you. Well, probably my view is 
that everything Senator Portman is talking about is language is 
important.
    What I would add to it is something I mentioned just in my 
sort of almost introductory remarks, and that is that I believe 
the Federal user should know. It is not just the authorization 
at the FedRAMP level when something is authorized that we 
should be looking at providence, but we should be looking at 
providence and measures of providence and disclosing them as 
part of what I will call consumer awareness to any Federal 
purchaser because a CIO, for example, at the Department of 
Education may have a different criteria and assessment of risk 
related to providence than a user in the intelligence community 
or at the Department of Defense.
    I believe that what I will call disclosure is important to 
the end user, and it should not be behind a curtain that only 
the folks in the FedRAMP or governing FedRAMP should be 
involved in.
    The second thing is I respect that Zscaler is passionate 
about authorization boundaries, but because we are in the 
supply chain security business we sometimes drive deeper into 
how things are built in companies. While I believe Zscaler is a 
great company doing stuff, we know that most of the stuff that 
is delivered in FedRAMP, almost everything that is delivered in 
FedRAMP is not built for the Federal Government. It is 
commercial products that are being adapted for the Federal 
Government.
    I is very unusual, for example, in what is technically 
called third-level support for when there is a trouble ticket 
that has to go back to developers, if the developers are in a 
foreign country, it is very normal for there to be free text 
fields, for example, in the trouble ticket system that includes 
PII that a developer in a foreign country who has to fix the 
problem can see.
    Those are the two things that we think are important, that 
really customer care systems need to get locked down and folks 
who are purchasers in the Federal Government should have 
exposure to some statement of providence and where the code is 
both developed and supported. That is my comment.
    Senator Hawley. That is very helpful. Thank you.
    Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Senator Portman. You are welcome. Yes, the other issue we 
talked about--and thank you for all that input. We have a 
little difference of opinion perhaps as to how the FedRAMP 
system currently works as it relates to inquiring into the 
origin of software or code in a cloud service offering, but 
that is a factual matter we just need to be sure we all 
understand.
    I do think that this risk is only going to increase, as was 
said. To Mr. Shive's point, I do not think that is prescriptive 
language at all. In fact, it gives you the ability to be able 
to do what I would assume you would want to do anyway but make 
sure that it gets done.
    In terms of potential conflicts of interest, looks like we 
are going to have some differences of opinion on this, too, and 
that is good. That is how we end up with legislation that 
actually makes sense. I just look at this, and I think, all of 
you respect your 3PAOs. This is for those who might be 
listening and are not following all the acronyms. That is the 
third-party assessment organization, and these are groups that 
do the assessment but at the behest of the company that is 
providing the cloud services. As I understand it, they pay for 
the service and they choose the 3PAO. Is that correct?
    Now again, I am sure that the 3PAOs that you all work with 
are all respectable folks and so on, but that just seems like a 
potential conflict of interest to me. Isn't there a better way 
to do it so that you get an assessment that does not have that, 
to use the word ``cloud'' a little differently, that cloud in 
terms of what the conclusion is?
    One idea I have had is rather than relying on private 
sector third parties who are paid for by the cloud service 
provider is to get a panel of experts--in this case, GSA, NIST 
would be involved--and have that panel of experts assess the 
security of the FedRAMP services.
    The cost would not be borne by taxpayers. It would be borne 
by the user, which is the same company that was going to pay 
this company on the private side that they had chosen, that 
they are paying, to give them the answer. Instead, you would be 
using an entity which is independent, and there would be a user 
fee attached to it. There would not be an additional cost, but 
there would be a distance there, in other words, an assurance 
that this conflict of interest would not be present.
    What do you all think about that? Is that a crazy idea? Is 
that something you thought about, and do you have other ideas? 
Let us start with you, Ms. Mahan.
    Ms. Mahan. Thank you. When we first established the program 
many years back, the 3PAO program, we mimicked it after how 
industry--like traditional certification programs that industry 
goes out and seeks today. We developed a framework using the 
ISO 17020 standards, which is an industry recognized standard. 
Within that standard, there is impartiality and independence 
clauses.
    We have a robust monitoring program on FedRAMP that 
whenever we receive assessments from 3PAOs we provide feedback. 
There is performance escalation criteria as well to help 
support and to monitor 3PAO performance, especially when it 
comes to this area.
    I appreciate your suggestion, Senator we are always 
receptive to feedback. We will take it into consideration, 
continue to work with the community as well as our stakeholders 
to drive change on the program.
    I will say that the 3PAOs play an absolutely critical role 
within this FedRAMP ecosystem. They are charged with validating 
that the security implementations from cloud service providers 
are true and accurate, which gives agencies, in turn, the 
ability to make those risk-based decisions in terms of using 
those cloud systems.
    We are absolutely on board to continue evolving this 
program, but just note that the way that we did establish it 
was also based on industry-recognized protocols that are in 
place today with other certification programs.
    Senator Portman. Mr. Kovac, do you have thoughts on this?
    Mr. Kovac. Senator, I would say Zscaler is a public company 
and we pay Pricewaterhouse to come do our audits, our 
financials. I do not see the difference. But I do not see a 
difference. I pay when I go to get my ISO, our global 
compliance, whether it is my GDPR for the E.U. or whether it is 
my IRAP in Australia or whether it is my ISO or my SOC 2 or my 
SOCs. I am always paying an independent auditor that I hired.
    I think that the FedRAMP policy is in line with almost 
every other audit that we do across the corporate world. I 
think that you have to believe that your 3PAO is going to be 
ethical and do their job. If they do not, me as a CSP, would 
throw them out, and I have done it for sure.
    I will tell you that to think that it stops at just the 
3PAO, it does not because once we finish our 3PAO and we get 
our ``they said OK'' then it goes into the FedRAMP world, where 
they now do their, and as Ms. Mahan just said. They do their 
assessment of our 3PAO's work, and then the JAB does the work 
all over again. So they are heavily involved in this process.
    I think that trying to find a way to regulate it to a group 
of people is going to slow the process tremendously, and like I 
said earlier, it is the way we do all our independent audits, 
and I would be troubled to get away from that.
    Senator Portman. Yes. I appreciate that. I make the obvious 
point that we have had some captured auditors as well.
    Mr. Kovac. Yes, I agree.
    Senator Portman. This is about security. It is not about 
auditing your books. It is about ensuring that we do not have 
the terrible situation that could occur, where you have a lack 
of security within the cloud services that the Federal 
Government and we taxpayers are all relying on. It is a 
different sort of assessment than, what Deloitte might do for 
your company in terms of an audit.
    Any other thoughts? Mr. Stern, do you have any thoughts on 
that?
    Mr. Stern. Yes, Senator Portman. Thanks for asking. First 
of all, I think the 3PAOs are absolutely necessary to have a 
scalable program, which means a program where you can bring 
services on and authorize services in a timely manner, on the 
one hand.
    On the other hand, I think one potential approach here is 
to have the 3PAOs directly under the supervision and assigned 
by GSA so that GSA hires the 3PAO and assigns the 3PAO and 
where the company pays as part of some sort of fee to have it 
done, but the 3PAOs are hired and assigned by GSA. That may be 
the solution.
    Senator Portman. Yes, that is something that I think makes 
some sense, too, to look at because you could have a panel of 
various auditors in essence and instead of having the company 
choose the auditor it would be from a group of auditors that 
you all, being GSA, have certified. In essence, you are 
certifying them anyway, right?
    Ms. Mahan. That is correct.
    Senator Portman. Yes. So you could make the decision even 
on an arbitrary basis if necessary, which would cut out 
obviously that issue of you are choosing your own 3PAO auditor 
and paying that auditor. You would still pay, but you will be 
paying a fee. I think that is an interesting idea as well.
    My final one is just on the cost and the timing and the 
compliance burdens, the consistency across agencies. What can 
be done to improve that? Mr. Fisic, I am going to ask you to 
address that.
    Mr. Fisic. Thanks, Senator. For one moment, I would like to 
address, having the--can you hear me? Does that work? OK. Thank 
you.
    Just one second, please. I would say that, having the GSA 
or the FedRAMP Program Management Office (PMO) select your 3PAO 
works against smaller organizations from a cost perspective, 
kind of leading to the next question here. We create 
efficiencies at scale, where I have 15 global certifications we 
maintain. If I use Schellman or Coalfire or these larger global 
organizations that are well respected, No. 1 and two of FedRAMP 
authorizations, it really works against us as a smaller 
organization. Sure, we will get some benefits if GSA at scale 
for the government, engages them, but that is a concern there.
    We are a FedRAMP-tailored low. We do not have a lot of PII. 
We have heard a lot of high, moderate supporting these large 
organizations. We support libraries, the Library of Congress, 
libraries on military installations as part of our core support 
to the Federal Government. As a library services company, we do 
not charge a lot of money as a not for profit.
    Some of the concerns we have is I have two full-time 
governance analysts running. I have a full service now, which 
is a governance risk and compliance system running. I have 400 
developers. We have 150 and up applications; 26 are in FedRAMP 
scope. But the churn created for smaller organizations, we 
spend up to $10 million a year as a not for profit that makes 
200 a year on security and, trying to do the right thing to 
support our customers.
    I think that as we talk about these highs, moderates, lows 
we really need to think the impacts to the smaller 
organizations and maybe an additional lens of risk.
    I understand, 30, 90, 60 days to remediate any sort of 
vulnerability. That is a huge impact for a smaller 
organization. If there was just that additional risk 
assessment--say, OK, these guys, they know what book you took 
out, right? Why are they even in the program? Sure, it helps 
us. It is an easy framework. I can communicate to the board. I 
can do all these things. It is good practice and things we do 
anyway, but the sunk cost to do that really impacts our bottom 
line and serving the communities and some of the least 
represented people globally. It is not just in the United 
States, the communities we serve.
    I would ask the Committee to look at that. Think about that 
additional lens, a true risk picture outside of these mandatory 
high levels, moderates or lows. Let us put some reality check 
in there. We are smart enough where we can just, look at an 
organization and formalize that, just an additional check or an 
outside agency look, to say: OK. OCLC or another smaller 
company, you do not really have a lot of data that the Federal 
Government is concerned about. Maybe we can lower that risk 
level, lower the costs, some of those reporting compliance 
requirements, monthly reporting, going through the churn of 
POAMs and all these other things.
    I am a fan of FedRAMP. I have been with the program for 4 
years. It has continually evolved and gotten better. I think it 
is the right thing for the government to do, as somebody who 
worked for the DOD before, and I fully support it.
    But I just ask for the team to look at it through that 
additional risk lens and be cognizant of the small guys out 
there because it really hurts us. It is what we want to do, but 
just that administrative overhead is massive. We are not a 
Zscaler. We are not all these companies. We have a 10 person 
security team working 15 hours a day trying to do the right 
thing. I thank you for the time.
    Senator Portman. Yes, that is great input. Thank you. It is 
about size, but it is also about degree of risk.
    Mr. Fisic. Right.
    Senator Portman. So you could be a small company but be in 
a highly sensitive area, high risk area in terms of your data. 
Vice versa, you could be a larger company, a for-profit company 
that does not have that kind of risk. That is very helpful, and 
that goes to the compliance burdens.
    Again, we want to end up with the best services being 
provided and do it at the most cost-effective way possible and 
then taking into account this increasing issue of foreign 
interference and being sure you are doing everything to avoid 
the foreign hackers from getting into your system and getting 
into our cloud.
    Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Chairman Peters. Thank you, Ranking Member Portman.
    Just kind of as a wrap-up question, I am going to ask each 
of you to respond. We will start with you, Mr. Stern and then 
Mr. Nodurft. We will start at that end of the table and work 
the other way around.
    As we are writing legislation and thinking of policy, I 
think it is always really good to think about how you measure 
success, what is a successful program. If we were to pass this 
bipartisan legislation that we have before us right now, I 
would like each of you to tell me what you think the single 
most important, relevant indicator of success will be if we 
look back at what we have done. Two or three years from now, 
looking back, what is going to be the single most important, 
relevant indicator of success for the FedRAMP program? Mr. 
Stern, if you would give me your thoughts on that.
    Mr. Stern. Sure. For me, the single most important 
indicator of success, if we look back on it, will be 
transparency in the supply chain for the Federal buyer, simple 
as that.
    Chairman Peters. OK. Great. Mr. Nodurft.
    Mr. Nodurft. Thank you, Senator. New and emerging 
technology companies feel as though that there is market 
certainty around the FedRAMP program enough to invest in the 
security measures necessary to enter the Federal marketplace. I 
think that lowering the barrier and increasing the number of 
authorizations available and making that emerging technology, 
accessible to the Federal agencies that need it is going to be 
a big marker of success.
    Chairman Peters. Great. Mr. Kovac.
    Mr. Kovac. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In my opinion, I think 
when you look at reciprocity it is going to be--reciprocity and 
reuse, I mean. Assuming that we resolve the security questions 
which are extremely important. I hope you know that and feel 
that I understand that. But this reciprocity, agencies being 
able to reuse something that is trusted and something that is 
being monitored on a monthly basis and being able to be quick 
to market.
    But also reciprocity, as I stated earlier and I wanted to 
bring back up, is when the community itself bonds together to 
help other CSPs, which you are seeing. Today there is a couple 
of large players and a couple of moderate players have joined 
together, and they have built this ATO as a Service. What it 
is, is it helps small companies that are ISVs, that could not 
afford it normally, come in and buy infrastructure off one of 
the hyperclouds, buy their consulting off one of the big time 
3PAOs, buy the security, say, off of a Zscaler and buy the SIM 
and the data login off of a Splunk or a, SomaLogic. They are 
buying their ITSM off ServiceNow and being able to get that 
prepackaged product.
    The fact that the industry has come together to do this has 
shown the belief in the industry, and that is reciprocity 
working two ways. It is reciprocity working for the agencies 
and then the CSPs giving reciprocity to each other and joining 
together. I should say 127 different applications of our cloud 
being used by third party people that are not the agency that 
they have used to get their FedRAMP, to get Zero Trust as part 
of their FedRAMP offering. Those are stunning numbers, and I 
think that is a very important place.
    If we can make that work, if we continue to grow that 
community, we could lower cost, decrease time to market, and 
make the reciprocity reuse issue become just key. So that is my 
No. 1.
    Chairman Peters. Great. Thank you. Mr. Fisic.
    Mr. Fisic. I have to echo what Mr. Kovac said. It speeds 
resolution or certification, automation, true risk focus, and 
putting the resources toward that and optimizing the process. 
To me, the most important thing we could do is continue 
focusing on that, address the risk and automate in every way 
that we can to speed the compliance process, continuous 
monitoring, and all those things. I think that is vital to my 
organization and many others. Let us streamline this and 
standardize it, and let us ingest it as a matter of course 
without creating additional risk for organizations.
    Chairman Peters. Great. Thank you. Mr. Mill.
    Mr. Mill. There is a lot of factors that go into making 
FedRAMP successful because it has multiple goals of security, 
effectiveness, bringing the best tools into government. The way 
that I would look at it is to take from the vantage point of 
people inside of an agency who want to use those tools.
    In a successful FedRAMP program, people inside of an agency 
can look around and they can see, there is this awesome tool 
that has been on the market now for a few years. It is leading. 
It would dramatically improve how we work. It would change the 
shape of our operations.
    In a successful world, that is a routine thing. That is not 
a huge ask inside that organization because of all of the 
factors together, because the chief information officer is used 
to working with cloud providers. There is high trust in the 
FedRAMP program and what goes on behind it, and the 
bureaucratic path inside these agencies is well-trod. If it is 
already a use in the Federal Government, then all the better, 
right? That is a natural, easy thing for people to do.
    One thing we would look to see whether it is successful, is 
whether that is something that people continue to exercise as 
an option.
    Chairman Peters. Thank you. Mr. Shive.
    Mr. Shive. I am the IT guy, so we measure everything. What 
I would propose is some sort of value measure across four 
really easy-to-understand domains.
    Velocity. Are we increasing the velocity of authorizations 
through automation and optimized processes, things like that?
    Quality. Is the cybersecurity posture of the Federal 
Government better afterwards than beforehand? Are we more 
agile? Are we more responsive in response to the threat that we 
see?
    Costs. Are costs headed in the right direction through 
reuse and through optimization of the program?
    Then the last would be stakeholder experience. Do our 
industry partners, do our agency partners, do the compliance 
arms of government, NIST and stuff, do they all say that the 
program is easier to use, easier to understand? Is it more 
effective? That takes surveying those groups on a regular basis 
and measuring that over time. Classic value index-type 
thinking.
    Chairman Peters. Very good. The last word, Ms. Mahan.
    Ms. Mahan. Thank you. I could not agree more with my fellow 
panelists here. Continue to be transparent. Trying to usher as 
many cloud products through this process as efficiently as 
possible. Incorporating automation. Continuing to increase 
agency adoption as well as driving that reuse factor. That ``do 
once, use many times'' is something that we want to continue to 
see and continue to push limits across government.
    There is an incredible amount of transparency that is 
provided through this process, really putting security at the 
forefront of any agency and looking at these security 
materials, looking at the audits, and making that risk-based 
decision to use that given product. It is a combination of 
everything that my fellow panelists have said today moving 
forward.
    Chairman Peters. Wonderful. I would like to thank each and 
every one of you again for participating in the roundtable. It 
is an important subject. It is a complex subject. Appreciate 
all of your involvement in this and your willingness to share 
your expertise with the Committee as we work to address this 
issue.
    So with that, our roundtable is now adjourned. Thank you so 
much.
    [Whereupon, at 3:44 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

                            A P P E N D I X

                              ----------                              
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]



                                 

