
 - RISKY BUSINESS: COSTLY INACTION ON FEDERAL LEGACY IT

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]






 
                    RISKY BUSINESS: COSTLY INACTION


                          ON FEDERAL LEGACY IT

=======================================================================

                                HEARING

                               before the

               SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY, INFORMATION
                 TECHNOLOGY, AND GOVERNMENT INNOVATION

                                 of the

                         COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
                           AND ACCOUNTABILITY

                        HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

                    ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

                             FIRST SESSION

                               __________

                              MAY 10, 2023

                               __________

                           Serial No. 118-28

                               __________
                               
                               

  Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Accountability
  
  
  [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


                       Available on: govinfo.gov
                         oversight.house.gov or
                             docs.house.gov
                             
                             
                             
                  ______
                     
       U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE 
 52-162PDF          WASHINGTON : 2023
                            
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
               COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY

                    JAMES COMER, Kentucky, Chairman

Jim Jordan, Ohio                     Jamie Raskin, Maryland, Ranking 
Mike Turner, Ohio                        Minority Member
Paul Gosar, Arizona                  Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of 
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina            Columbia
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin            Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Gary Palmer, Alabama                 Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Clay Higgins, Louisiana              Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois
Pete Sessions, Texas                 Ro Khanna, California
Andy Biggs, Arizona                  Kweisi Mfume, Maryland
Nancy Mace, South Carolina           Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York
Jake LaTurner, Kansas                Katie Porter, California
Pat Fallon, Texas                    Cori Bush, Missouri
Byron Donalds, Florida               Jimmy Gomez, California
Kelly Armstrong, North Dakota        Shontel Brown, Ohio
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            Melanie Stansbury, New Mexico
William Timmons, South Carolina      Robert Garcia, California
Tim Burchett, Tennessee              Maxwell Frost, Florida
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Becca Balint, Vermont
Lisa McClain, Michigan               Summer Lee, Pennsylvania
Lauren Boebert, Colorado             Greg Casar, Texas
Russell Fry, South Carolina          Jasmine Crockett, Texas
Anna Paulina Luna, Florida           Dan Goldman, New York
Chuck Edwards, North Carolina        Jared Moskowitz, Florida
Nick Langworthy, New York
Eric Burlison, Missouri

                       Mark Marin, Staff Director
       Jessica Donlon, Deputy Staff Director and General Counsel
             Raj Bharwani, Senior Professional Staff Member
                 Lauren Lombardo, Senior Policy Analyst
                      Peter Warren, Senior Advisor
      Mallory Cogar, Deputy Director of Operations and Chief Clerk

                      Contact Number: 202-225-5074

                  Julie Tagen, Minority Staff Director

                      Contact Number: 202-225-5051
                                 ------                                

 Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government 
                               Innovation

                 Nancy Mace, South Carolina, Chairwoman
William Timmons, South Carolina      Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia 
Tim Burchett, Tennessee                  Ranking Minority Member
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Ro Khanna, California
Anna Paulina Luna, Florida           Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Chuck Edwards, North Carolina        Kweisi Mfume, Maryland
Nick Langworthy, New York            Jimmy Gomez, California
Eric Burlison, Missouri              Jared Moskowitz, Florida

                         C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

                              ----------                              
                                                                   Page

Hearing held on May 10, 2023.....................................     1

                               Witnesses

                              ----------                              

Mr. Kevin Walsh, Director, Information Technology and 
  Cybersecurity, U.S. Government Accountability Office
Oral Statement...................................................     5
Ms. Suzette Kent, Chief Executive Officer, Kent Advisory Services
Oral Statement...................................................     6
Mr. David Powner, Executive Director, Center for Data-Driven 
  Policy, The MITRE Corporation
Oral Statement...................................................     8

Written opening statements and statements for the witnesses are 
  available on the U.S. House of Representatives Document 
  Repository at: docs.house.gov.

                           Index of Documents

                              ----------                              

  * Statement and Letter, U.S. Chamber of Commerce; submitted by 
    Rep. Mace.

  * Questions for the Record: to Mr. Walsh; submitted by Rep. 
    Langworthy.

  * Questions for the Record: to Mr. Walsh; submitted by Rep. 
    Connolly.

  * Questions for the Record: to Mr. Powner; submitted by Rep. 
    Connolly.

  * Questions for the Record: to Ms. Kent; submitted by Rep. 
    Connolly.

Documents are available at: docs.house.gov.


                    RISKY BUSINESS: COSTLY INACTION



                          ON FEDERAL LEGACY IT

                              ----------                              


                        Wednesday, May 10, 2023

                        House of Representatives

               Committee on Oversight and Accountability

 Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government 
                               Innovation

                                                   Washington, D.C.

    The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:08 p.m., in 
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Nancy Mace 
[Chairwoman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
    Present: Representatives Mace, Timmons, Edwards, 
Langworthy, Burlison, Connolly, and Lynch.
    Ms. Mace. All right. Good afternoon, you all. The 
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and 
Government Innovation will come to order. Welcome, everyone. 
Love those red glasses. Those are super cool.
    Without objection, the Chair may declare a recess at any 
time, and I recognize myself for the purpose of making an 
opening statement.
    Good afternoon, and welcome to this hearing of the 
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and 
Government Innovation. An important role of this Subcommittee 
is ensuring Federal information technology is well managed, as 
you all are well aware. The Federal Government depends on IT 
systems for everything from national defense to homeland 
security to the administration of benefits programs.
    In all, we spend upwards of $100 billion of tax dollars 
annually for Federal IT. Notably, 75 to 80 percent of this 
spend currently goes to operating and maintaining existing IT 
systems, and much of that infrastructure is aging and obsolete. 
It relies on a shrinking pool of workers versed in archaic 
programming languages like COBOL, which came into common use 60 
years ago.
    I, myself, learned COBOL when I was starting my career in 
the late 1990's, and even then we knew that it was a legacy IT 
system. In fact, I was in the financial services sector, 
working in COBOL, and if I see another line of COBOL code today 
I might vomit. I might throw up.
    But at that time and now, computer coding provides a 
pathway for girls and women to advance into STEM fields, but 
gosh, I hope we can get beyond COBOL one day.
    But today's aspiring young coders are not learning COBOL. 
That is why the government, whose aging IT workforce includes 
many more individuals over 60 than under 30--it is actually 
four times in terms of those that are looking at retirement in 
the next few years versus those that are coming in that are 
younger and more adept with computer engineering and 
programming.
    A few years ago, GAO compiled a list of the 10 Federal IT 
systems most in need of overhaul due to their criticality and 
their obsolescence. One is a COBOL-based system used to process 
about 20 million Federal student financial aid applications 
annually. The system is older than the Department of Education, 
which opened its doors in 1980. That is kind of scary.
    Another COBOL-based system on GAO's list is an IRS system 
containing taxpayer data, that went on-line in 1968, long 
before I was born, more than a half century ago. The IRS 
continues to keep taxpayer data on this system and other hugely 
outdated systems, despite pouring billions of dollars over the 
years into failed modernization efforts.
    And I would be remiss if I did not add on, with the advent 
of AI, archaic legacy systems, archaic coding, consumer data, 
personal data, government data is all at a much higher risk 
today than it ever has been, and the way in which AI can be 
utilized to get after authentication, for example, puts us and 
our data, government and the private sector, those risks at an 
all-time high.
    The Biden Administration is now set to hire 20,000 new 
auditors over two years as part of a massive $80 billion hike 
in IRS spending, but what the IRS needs most are modern 
computers and call centers to answer the phone.
    What scares me is that Federal legacy computer systems are 
highly vulnerable to cyberattacks from malicious actors, 
including enemy nation states, and the danger is going to get a 
lot worse and fast. The rise of AI--oh, I looked at my notes; I 
already have AI and I already skipped ahead--will soon lead to 
increasingly sophisticated cyber assaults.
    That is why it is more important than ever that data of 
millions of students and taxpayers do not live on half-century-
old IT systems that are easily exploited by our enemies. So, we 
need to take and make progress on IT modernization by whatever 
means necessary and at our disposal.
    A new funding vehicle, the Technology Modernization Fund, 
was created in 2017. It provided another tool for replacing 
legacy IT. But it has become clear that it is a tool that needs 
sharpening. So, I intend to introduce legislation soon that 
will do just that. I expect this hearing to help inform that 
bill. Congress must act to ensure taxpayer personally 
identifiable information and other sensitive data are not wide 
open for thieves or foreign actors to plunder.
    The U.S. Chamber issued a statement. We have this beautiful 
letter today that we will enter into the record for today's 
hearing.
    Ms. Mace. It says that a time when America is confronting 
inflation and budgetary stresses, Congress must look to find 
new and creative ways to solve fiscal challenges and improve 
services through government IT modernization, and I could not 
agree more.
    This Subcommittee will continue to focus its oversight and 
legislative efforts on innovative solutions that actually move 
the needle on the old problem of IT modernization, and that is 
what this legislation will do, that is what this hearing will 
do today, and it is my hope that if we do nothing else in this 
Committee, because I doubt that we will, that we can find some 
nonpartisan--I am not kidding--that we can find a way, both 
sides, to work on this issue. This is not a partisan issue. And 
I hope that you will work with us and our Committee in finding 
ways that we can sharpen the tools that we have going forward.
    So, with that, I will yield to the Ranking Member of this 
Subcommittee, Mr. Gerry Connolly, of Virginia.
    Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thank you 
for having this hearing and your commitment to this critical 
set of issues that challenge all of us.
    To best accomplish their public service missions, Federal 
agencies need information technology systems that are 
efficient, effective, and secure. From facilitating veterans' 
on-line access to health and pension benefits to processing 
millions of taxpayers' vital IRS refunds, IT keeps our country 
running 24 hours, 7 days a week.
    But as we know, not all IT systems are created equal, as 
you just pointed out, Madam Chair. In fact, the Government 
Accountability Office found that of the $100 billion or so 
dedicated to IT and cyber-related investments, as much as 80 
percent of those dollars are spent on operation and maintenance 
expenses, including the legacy systems.
    While age itself is not inherently an indication of poor 
performance, those that are written in outdated language, as 
you just indicated, like COBOL, or operating on unsupported 
hardware and software, leave our government vulnerable to 
security threats. It is vital, therefore, that we work together 
to identify and update the legacy systems that need to be 
replaced.
    During my tenure as Chairman of the Government Operations 
Subcommittee, I focused the gavel on IT modernization. Over the 
course of eight hearings in the 117th Congress alone, we 
established that achieving quality IT demands three components: 
cost effectiveness, prioritized customer experience, and robust 
cyber infrastructure. While each of these factors may seem 
independently important, they are related and create the 
foundation for agencies' success. That is why I am immensely 
proud to have worked my former Republican colleagues on this 
Subcommittee to establish the Technology Modernization Fund.
    We engineered the TMF to re-imagine and transform the way 
Federal agencies invest in modern, nimble technology and to 
deliver services to families, businesses, and communities. We 
wrote the TMF with the clear intent to provide a flexible 
funding stream outside of the traditional appropriation 
process. We sought to enable multiyear investments that 
catalyze sweeping, complex, and transformative IT projects. 
TMF-funded IT modernization projects lower agency operating 
costs over time and fortify cybersecurity.
    Last year, the White House announced it would designate 
$100 million of the revolutionary $1 billion infusion in the 
TMF to improve Federal agency customer experience. The 
investments, if made wisely, could reduce wait times for vital 
services, eliminate duplicative time-consuming paperwork, and 
remove bureaucratic barriers that waste taxpayers' time and 
Federal agency resources. These efforts will rebuild public 
trust between themselves and our public institutions.
    I am proud to note that of the 39 projects that secured TMF 
investments across 24 agencies, GAO estimates that 25 have 
aspects of cybersecurity, with 11 projects primarily focused on 
security issues. By upgrading vulnerable systems our Federal 
Government can better protect itself and the people it serves 
from data breaches, critical infrastructure hacks, and the 
leakage of national security information. I hope to continue 
this Subcommittee's bipartisan tradition and work with my 
colleagues on the other side of the aisle to reauthorize this 
program.
    I also remain committed to using the FITARA scorecard as a 
tool to modernize legacy IT. Over its past 15 iterations, this 
oversight effort has resulted in more than $6.6 billion in cost 
savings and avoidance from 2012 to 2021, alone. The lion's 
share of this success comes from the closure of unnecessary 
data centers and agencies' migration to the cloud. The 
scorecard works hand-in-glove with the goals of the National 
Cybersecurity Strategy, including pushing for the elimination 
of legacy IT system.
    As a result, our Subcommittee recently updated the new 
cybersecurity metric on the FITARA scorecard to include zero 
trust as a component of the score. This evolution incentivizes 
agencies to modernize and stay in front of emerging cyber 
threats. In addition, the scorecard has improved agencies' IT 
investment in development strategies by addressing cost 
overruns, schedule slippages, and poor project management.
    We must improve how we track IT modernization planning and 
implementation. We know what happens when an agency does not 
have a plan, does not have timelines for project completion, 
and is not delivering on its modernization goals.
    In a recent GAO study that I requested, GAO found that IT 
challenges at the IRS, for example, are substantial, due to 
planning and implementation deficiencies. Legacy IT costs are 
still unknown. Modernization plans lack timelines for the 
disposition of legacy systems. Nearly a quarter of the agency's 
software inventory is legacy software, and the effort to 
replace the 60-year-old individual master file is on hold, with 
no end in sight.
    Last, the scorecard emphasizes the need for agency IT 
working capital funds, separate appropriations accounts within 
an agency designated specifically for modernization, and other 
essential IT investments that can be used outside of the rigid 
and sometimes unpredictable annual appropriation process.
    Embracing modern and secure IT solutions is crucial for 
Federal agencies to streamline operations, enhance 
cybersecurity, and fulfill their missions. I know that everyone 
on this dais is interested in and committed to ensuring that we 
have 21st century Federal Government for our constituents. I 
intend to continue our Committee's dogged oversight of Federal 
agencies' IT modernization effort to ensure that we live up to 
that commitment.
    Again, I want to welcome our panelists. I have worked with 
all three, and I think they are great choices today, Madam 
Chairwoman, and I look forward to hearing their testimony. 
Thank you.
    Ms. Mace. Thank you, Mr. Connolly. And today I am pleased 
to introduce our witnesses for today's hearing. Our first 
witness is Mr. Kevin Walsh, Director of Information Technology 
at the U.S. Government Accountability Office, or GAO. The 
second witness is Ms. Suzette Kent, a global business 
transformation executive who has previously served as the 
Federal Chief Information Officer for the United States. And 
our third witness is Mr. David Powner, Director for the 
Strategic Engagement and Partnerships with the MITRE 
Corporation. We welcome everyone and we are pleased to have you 
here this afternoon.
    Pursuant to Committee Rule 9(g), the witnesses will please 
stand and raise their right hands.
    Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony that you 
are about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing 
but the truth, so help you God?
    Mr. Walsh. I do.
    Ms. Kent. I do.
    Mr. Powner. I do.
    Ms. Mace. Let the record show that the witnesses all 
answered in the affirmative.
    We appreciate all of you being here today and look forward 
to your testimony. Let me remind the witnesses that we have 
read your written statements and they will appear in full in 
the hearing record. Please limit your oral statements to five 
minutes. As a reminder, please press the button on the 
microphone in front of you so that it is on, and the Members up 
here can hear you.
    When you begin to speak, the light in front of you will 
turn green. After four minutes the light will turn yellow, and 
when the red light comes on your five minutes has expired, and 
we would just ask that you please wrap up your comments.
    I would like to recognize Mr. Walsh to please begin your 
opening statement.

                        STATEMENT OF KEVIN WALSH

                                DIRECTOR

                INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CYBERSECURITY

                 U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

    Mr. Walsh. Chairwoman Mace, Ranking Member Connolly, and 
Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for inviting GAO to 
testify on this important issue.
    I am sure you will not be surprised to hear that the 
government has a legacy IT problem. However, it is hard to know 
the true scope of the issue. According to the MGT Act, a legacy 
IT system is outdated or obsolete. To build on that, our 
Federal CIO has noted that not all old systems are legacy, and 
``old'' does not necessarily mean bad, antiquated, risky, or in 
need of retirement. I agree. Replacing all of the old IT in the 
government would be a monstrous task and probably a waste of 
funds.
    The Federal CIO is most concerned with legacy that is out 
of support, cannot be patched, has availability issues, or 
cannot meet user needs or policy goals--systems whose security 
cannot keep pace with adversaries. Again, I agree.
    Those worrisome situations become more prevalent if we 
ignore our aging technology. As our systems get older they cost 
more to secure, more to maintain, do not always meet mission 
needs, and, in some cases, the only people who can update them 
are retired.
    Some of these systems may persist because agencies are not 
required to identify and evaluate what should be kept. OMB 
drafted guidance in 2016 that would have required agencies to 
do exactly that. Regrettably, that guidance remains in draft 
form. To OMB's credit, their subsequent 2018 guidance on high-
value assets could cover the most important legacy systems. 
However, the government cannot afford to ignore the rest of its 
IT.
    In addition, the recently released National Cyber Strategy 
calls for Federal efforts to eliminate legacy systems that are 
costly to maintain and difficult to defend against 
sophisticated cyber threats. However, it will be hard for the 
government to eliminate legacy systems if we do not know what 
we have.
    To do so, agencies would need an inventory of their IT 
systems, as called for in OMB's draft guidance. After that, 
agencies should identify their legacy systems, prioritize them 
to determine what we should keep, or modernize, replace, or 
retire. These decisions could be based on factors including how 
risky it will be, including risks to security and privacy, the 
criticality of the system, cost to modernize or maintain the 
current system as well as any potential cost savings, whether 
mission needs are being met, and if additional functionality or 
benefits could be gained.
    To be clear, there will be instances where modernization 
may not make sense at this time. That is a good thing. We want 
agencies to be responsible stewards of taxpayer dollars. Having 
the newest toys and gadgets, like Batman, does not necessarily 
mean good governance or even good IT. There will also be 
modernizations that cost more money than they save. However, in 
those instances there should be other benefits that can be 
gained, such as increased cybersecurity, better functionality, 
or better performance.
    These reviews of agencies' IT portfolios to identify legacy 
IT should also note be a one-time exercise, but they should be 
part of a core part of our portfolio management in the 
government.
    Finally, as we modernize or replace our systems, we should 
make sure that the old systems get turned off.
    This concludes my comments, and I look forward to your 
questions.
    Ms. Mace. Thank you, Mr. Walsh.
    And I now would like to recognize Ms. Kent for your five 
minutes.

                       STATEMENT OF SUZETTE KENT

                        CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER

                         KENT ADVISORY SERVICES

    Ms. Kent. Chairwoman Mace, Ranking Member Connolly, and 
distinguished Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the 
opportunity to speak with you regarding Federal information 
technology.
    This Committee has been unwavering in demonstrating 
bipartisan commitment to improving the mission outcomes of 
government through better uses of technology. Reminders of the 
dangers of archaic IT infrastructure are evident every day in 
both public and private sector--data stolen, travel disrupted, 
power grids compromised, people in businesses deprived of 
services, lives threatened, and our homeland security impugned.
    And these dangers are like ticking time bombs, becoming 
more severe as the use of AI and the attacks on encrypted data 
become more sophisticated. And despite congressional and 
executive branch directives, despite creation of new funding 
vehicles, and the ever-present pressure of mission needs, some 
agencies have still struggled to make significant progress 
tackling that technical debt.
    My comments today are going to draw my personal experiences 
of over 30 years in global technology and having served as the 
Federal CIO and working closely with IT teams to address these 
issues. But let us reflect very quickly on the current 
situation. The strategic plan and the annual budget process 
should be the primary lever, but it is not timely and budgets 
have been flat for the last decade.
    The Technology Modernization Fund, it was created as a 
source for urgent needs and to provide a multiyear vehicle 
focusing on legacy IT transition, cybersecurity, and emerging 
technology, but it could use sharpening.
    Working capital funds. This vehicle gives agencies 
flexibility, but not all agencies choose to establish a working 
capital fund. And we do have public-private partnerships and 
grants that are effective to explore new technology, but these 
are not scale options.
    Although these tools have all yielded positive results, it 
is not at the pace of technology change or to scale that 
overcomes technical debt.
    So, some areas for exploration for this Committee could be 
reestablishing priority, making legacy transition an agency 
priority, and updating how those outcomes are measured. Give 
agencies a specific directive, and update one of the various 
scoring mechanisms, ROI, FITARA, IT Dashboard, or potentially 
new measures to bring laser focus to agency progress, 
eliminating outdated technology.
    As you heard from Mr. Walsh, there has long been ambiguity 
about defining legacy, but focus on cyber vulnerabilities and 
areas that hinder the mission goals and consider using the GAO 
reports of legacy systems with the most significant risks to 
aim these directives.
    Enhance the planning processes by mandating comprehensive 
transformation plans with financial estimates and timelines. If 
directing agencies to produce a plan for migration for the most 
egregious applications, Congress could then validate those 
plans or incorporate it into agency strategic plans, supporting 
the funding base on those plans, and hold agencies accountable. 
In this way, Congress supports the actions from end to end, and 
this is very important because it is likely these efforts span 
multiple administrations, so bipartisan support is critical.
    Modernizing the process for defining project value, 
expanding business case metrics to include things beyond cost 
savings, like risk reduction, value to mission, or improved 
resource availability, and very important, modernizing 
workforce.
    Accelerate the Office of Personnel Management's commitment 
to expanding skills-based hiring for technology roles. Current 
technology use requires current skills, regardless if people 
lack traditional post-secondary academic degrees. Skills-based 
hiring should not be looked at as an exception, but as a real 
pathway forward to rejuvenate the Federal workforce. Technology 
capabilities are available to do this, and they are proven.
    Congress can accelerate overhaul of legacy systems by 
making it a clear priority, shining a light on what is wrong 
with the processes, focusing measurement funding on the 
problem, and using expanded pathways to bring in talent that 
can deliver this transition.
    These are the areas that I would submit where Congress can 
be an accelerator for modernizing the technology that runs our 
government and serves the people of our Nation. Thank you.
    Ms. Mace. Thank you, Ms. Kent.
    And now Mr. Powner, you are recognized for your opening 
statement.

                           (Minority Witness)

                        STATEMENT OF DAVE POWNER

                           EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR

                     CENTER FOR DATA-DRIVEN POLICY

                         THE MITRE CORPORATION

    Mr. Powner. Chairwoman Mace, Ranking Member Connolly, and 
Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to 
testify on Federal IT. I work for MITRE, a nonprofit 
corporation that operates in the public interest. Currently, I 
lead its Center for Data-Driven Policy, where we draw on our 
expertise on topics like acquisition and cybersecurity to bring 
objective, nonpartisan insights to policymakers.
    Prior to joining MITRE, I was at GAO, where I worked 
closely with this Committee crafting FITARA, helping with the 
creation of the scorecard, and assisting in its bipartisan IT 
oversight. This included oversight of legacy systems. 
Memorably, I testified at a 2016 hearing on legacy systems when 
then-Chairman Chaffetz opened the hearing by waving an 8-inch 
floppy disk that was used on a backup nuclear command and 
control system.
    We all understand what is at stake here. Critical Federal 
systems are operating with known security vulnerabilities and 
unsupported hardware and software. These legacy systems support 
important missions like wartime readiness and operation of 
critical infrastructure.
    Before I get into the main points in my testimony, I first 
want to commend this Committee for its consistent and 
bipartisan oversight of cyber and IT issues over the past 10 
years. This Committee's leadership has resulted in more secure 
and efficient Federal operations and considerable cost savings.
    I have two overarching points to make this afternoon. 
First, despite recent calls for action on our Nation's critical 
legacy systems, the Federal Government's plans, budgets, and 
actions are not where they need to be.
    Second, I think it is essential that Congress steps forward 
and takes the lead by putting in place legislation that 
requires prioritized inventories, related modernization plans, 
and actions to ensure progress against those plans. I would 
like to expand on each of these.
    In late 2001, we published a paper that made several 
recommendations to Congress to update the 2014 Federal 
Information Security Modernization Act, known as FISMA, to meet 
the advanced threats posed by China, Russia, and nation states. 
One recommendation was to modernize legacy IT systems to reduce 
costs and vulnerability.
    Last year, I testified at the FITARA 13 scorecard hearing 
and helped to author a paper published by the American Council 
for Technology-Industry Advisory Council, known as ACT-IAC, on 
evolving the FITARA scorecard. Both my testimony and that 
report recommended an IT modernization category be added to the 
scorecard.
    Last year, Senators Maggie Hassan and John Cornyn 
introduced the Legacy IT Reduction Act of 2022, that required 
agencies to develop an inventory of legacy IT systems and a 
plan to modernize those systems.
    And the current Administration has also highlighted the 
need to address legacy IT systems. Most recently, the White 
House and its National Cybersecurity Strategy called for OMB to 
develop a plan to accelerate IT modernization and specifically 
to eliminate legacy systems.
    Despite the many calls to action, agency modernization 
plans and efforts to replace these systems have failed to keep 
pace. There are several reasons for this, including the 
complexity of upgrading older versions of software, a 
reluctance to accept the risks of transferring mission-critical 
processing off of mainframes to cloud solutions, a short-term 
focus driven by annual budgets, and the lack of executive 
branch policies and legislation calling for multiyear budgets 
to support modernization.
    Congress has an opportunity to catalyze this needed 
modernization effort. My written statement contains 10 
recommendations for OMB, Congress, agencies, and industry. The 
two recommendations for Congress are this: One--enact 
legislation similar to the Legacy IT Reduction Act of 2022, 
introduced last session in the Senate, and implement the FITARA 
scorecard recommendation, which includes adding a legacy 
modernization category to it.
    The other recommendations call for OMB to apply more 
urgency to their directives and for agencies to apply AI and 
machine learning to extract information from legacy IT 
platforms.
    In summary, the U.S. has long been a global leader in 
technology. We have the tools and the expertise required to 
modernize and improve our outdated government IT systems. What 
is needed now is leadership and action.
    We look forward to working with you, Chairwoman Mace and 
Ranking Member Connolly. This concludes my statement. I look 
forward to your questions.
    Ms. Mace. Thank you, and I will now recognize myself for 
five minutes. I want to thank you all for the testimony you 
submitted today, the feedback, your ideas, legislative and 
otherwise, and explaining why we are where we are today.
    One of the interesting things, Mr. Walsh, about your 
testimony today was acknowledging that the Federal Government 
does not know, I guess, what all systems that we have, which is 
deeply concerning to me. I would think we have got contracts, 
we have receipts for the contracts we have, that we would have 
some way to track this. And I guess we do not have a system 
that tracks what software different agencies have right now?
    Mr. Walsh. In some cases, yes, we are not accurately 
tracking, and in other cases it is the right hand not knowing 
what the left is doing. And in a third case I would add 
identifying something as legacy requires being familiar with 
what it is doing and not doing well, and in a lot of cases we 
are not doing a good enough job evaluating our own systems and 
figuring out what is working and what is not.
    Ms. Mace. Gotcha. Thank you. And then compared to the 
private sector, Mr. Walsh, the Federal Government spends a 
great proportion of its IT budget operating and maintaining 
legacy systems rather than investing in new ones, and you have 
sort of a different perspective on this too. But do you believe 
it tends to make the Federal data that we have more vulnerable 
to cyberattacks because of that? What are your thoughts on 
that?
    Mr. Walsh. So, in part, yes. As our systems get older they 
get more vulnerable, easier to hack, and certainly less secure, 
harder to maintain. The private sector spends less, has better 
technology, but they face different threats, right. In terms of 
cybersecurity, nation state actors are much more focused on us. 
They are still going after private sector, especially China, 
Iran, certain other bad actors like Russia.
    Ms. Mace. Russia.
    Mr. Walsh. But our legacy IT can afford to get older 
because we are trying to be responsible stewards of taxpayer 
dollars. I think, you know, as I said, having all the newest 
and the best tools works for private industry--you know, the 
big companies, Google, Microsoft, and the like--but I 
personally would not want all the newest tools to be at USDA. I 
want the tools that are right, that are doing their job well, 
and I want USDA to periodically look at them and make that 
evaluation. But having the newest flash-bang computers should 
not be something that the government entertains.
    Ms. Mace. Thank you. And then as I mentioned earlier in my 
opening statement, the Federal Government employs about four 
times as many IT professionals over the age of 60 versus under 
the age of 30, and we seem to be doubling down on outdated 
technology and older hires. We actually had the Director of OPM 
here, and this is not your fault, but it was the worst witness 
we have ever had, I mean, ever. It was just terrible. And I was 
just shocked that she was able to even hold that position.
    But when we look at that issue of hiring employees, we 
recently saw a report that GAO reported the Social Security 
Administration recently had to hire tech folks out of 
retirement to maintain its COBOL system. So, how can we, as a 
government that is so slow, that is so bureaucratic, that is so 
old, well, not literally, but literally and figuratively in the 
IT systems that we have, how can we assemble a younger, more 
tech-savvy workforce when, you know, in its most pressing need 
for experts that have obsolete software needs? And so, without 
such a workforce, how can we move forward? We have all these 
people retiring soon, in the next couple of years, and not 
hiring enough young----
    So, what are some of your thoughts on how we address that 
challenge?
    Mr. Walsh. So, in some cases we have already done, and your 
Committee has been a large part of this, given the flexibility 
to agencies to try and find new ways to put money into IT and 
also try to find new ways to get more IT talent into the 
government, because you are absolutely right, we are facing a 
pending wave of Federal employees who are going to retire and 
take a lot of knowledge and expertise with them.
    If we are going to avoid paying a premium to bring them 
back from the golf courses then we need to make sure that we 
have that next cadre of IT professionals coming.
    Ms. Mace. And they do not need a college degree to do it 
either, right?
    Mr. Walsh. Absolutely not.
    Ms. Mace. Yes. A member of my family never went to college, 
makes more money than I do. He is 21 and owns his own home. I 
did this wrong. When I got out of school, programming, we were 
making $35,000 a year in the late 1990's, so much different 
perspective.
    I have got one last question I did want to ask. FAA issues 
with legacy systems and the FAA legacy system failures, 
critical agency functions were on full display earlier this 
year when the FAA, in January, had to suspend flights because 
of a breakdown of a key computer system in my district at 
Hilton Head Island Airport. Outdated technology forces air 
traffic controllers to use binoculars, 1800s-level technology, 
to coordinate plane landings.
    How many such critical Federal operations are running on 
outdated technologies like this, anywhere?
    Mr. Walsh. Uncountable. Uncountable. Disappointingly. 
Enormous.
    Ms. Mace. Yes. Thank you.
    I would now like to yield five minutes to the Ranking 
Member, Mr. Connolly.
    Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
    Ms. Kent, we talked about bipartisanship. You worked in 
what Administration as CIO?
    Ms. Kent. I was appointed during the Trump Administration.
    Mr. Connolly. And did you find us cooperative in your 
endeavors?
    Ms. Kent. I found this Committee to be engaging and 
cooperative as we sought ways, much like these challenges, to 
move forward.
    Mr. Connolly. All right. I do not want to ruin your 
reputation in certain corridors, but I thought it was a very 
productive relationship, and I am so glad to see you again, and 
thank you for your efforts to try to promote positive change 
within the Federal Government.
    Why, your experience as CIO, why do not we just retire 
legacy systems? I mean, my refrigerator is old and I replace 
it, after 20 years, certainly after 60. So, why--you were CIO, 
what is your experience why Federal agencies do not do it?
    Ms. Kent. Risk, cost, and resources. And I want to use a 
specific example that kind of harkens back to the last 
question. One of the TMF projects that we did was a project for 
HUD, and what they looked at was the fact that they had seven 
legacy systems, we started with three, that had seven million 
lines of COBOL code, and that was written by a small group of 
individuals that were no longer able to help with any 
modernization efforts.
    Mr. Connolly. They were not even on the golf course.
    Ms. Kent. They were not even on the golf course. They were 
not even available to show up at work.
    And what they did was actually bring in technology to 
convert that 70 million lines of code to 1.2 million lines of 
Java. We used a tool. We tested the tool. The agency moved the 
capabilities. They managed the risks during that effort, and 
now we could hire new college grads because they were competent 
in Java.
    And so, that is a great example of an agency stepping 
forward, they accepted the risk, they made the technology 
investment, and then they hired the people to sustain the path 
going forward, but not every agency chooses to be that bold.
    Mr. Connolly. I think you put it well--risks and costs, 
particularly.
    Mr. Powner, from your days at GAO, it is a big deal to 
replace your legacy systems, and maybe upgrade your IT while 
you are at it. I mean, we are talking multibillion-dollar, 
multiyear kind of thing. For a manager to invest political 
capital in that endeavor is a big deal, and he or she may not 
be around to even see the fruits of that endeavor. And then, 
even though we spend $100 billion a year, 80 percent of it is 
spoken for. And so, I do need working capital, don't I, to try 
to decide to make this big decision.
    Mr. Powner. Yes, I think the key here is you need a long-
term, multiyear focus to tackle these problems. The annual 
budget cycle does not help with that. And that is where I think 
legislation, if you could get focused on the right set of 
systems that we really need to tackle. I agree with Mr. Walsh 
that there are a lot of these systems out there----
    Mr. Connolly. But let me interrupt you, if I may, because I 
am going to run out of time. But is not that why Congress, led 
by my former Republican colleague, Will Hurd, on this 
Subcommittee, created TMF, to have working capital to try to 
incentivize people to go beyond the year-to-year----
    Mr. Powner. Yes, both TMF and the working capital funds in 
the MGTF were both two tools that you really want to use, as 
Ms. Kent mentioned, moving forward.
    But I do think you need to prioritize inventory because we 
have so many of these things, and that is where I think the 
focus from Congress requiring that prioritized inventory that 
could be tracked, not only by the Congress but tracked by the 
Federal CIO, and also you could use the IT Dashboard for 
transparency. We need better light and focus on these things so 
that we can make progress on not only putting good plans in 
place, but eventually putting new systems in place.
    Mr. Connolly. Real quickly, Mr. Walsh, as the FITARA 
scorecard and 17 oversight hearings with respect to it, do you 
think made a material difference in incentivizing Federal 
agencies to upgrade their IT?
    Mr. Walsh. Yes.
    Mr. Connolly. Save money?
    Mr. Walsh. Yes.
    Mr. Connolly. Ms. Kent, same question.
    Ms. Kent. It definitely placed focus and saved money, and 
as we have had many conversations in the past, it is like the 
IT question that we are talking about is we need to continue to 
advance what we measure and be very focused on the next 
challenge.
    Mr. Connolly. Absolutely. Mr. Powner, same question.
    Mr. Powner. Yes, it has, and I think it is important to 
evolve it to things like our workforce, like better metrics in 
the cybersecurity area, and legacy modernization.
    Mr. Connolly. Yes. And just let me end, Madam Chairwoman, I 
would be delighted to work with you in adding this legacy 
modernization category to the scorecard because I think we have 
got to have plans in place to finally retire legacy systems and 
a timeline and a budget for how we do that.
    Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thank you again to our 
panel.
    Ms. Mace. Thank you, Mr. Connolly.
    I would now like to recognize Congressman Timmons from the 
great state of South Carolina, for your five minutes.
    Mr. Timmons. Thank you, Madam Chair.
    I have served as a prosecutor in a local district 
attorney's office. I have been in the state Senate, and I have 
been in Congress for a number of years, and this has been an 
ongoing question--how do we effectively modernize our IT to 
make sure that we are good stewards of the data that we have?
    I think the bigger challenge is the government does not 
really have traditional accountability. Private businesses are 
fined or settle court cases for over $1 billion, hundreds of 
millions of dollars, so there is a free market incentive for 
what motivates them to protect their data.
    We recently had the DC Health Exchange in. They are a 
hybrid, they are pseudo, quasi government, so it will be 
interesting to see how that plays out. The CFPB recently had a 
breach, and that was more user error, but that resulted in a 
250,000 individuals' personally identifiable information to be 
leaked, which resulted in a lot of fraudulent unemployment 
claims, which, you know, it is very interesting what people do 
with data.
    But again, this is just a major problem, and I want to talk 
about damages. What happens to the CFPB, what is the recourse 
for the individuals that have been aggrieved based off of a 
government breach, based off a government failure to protect 
data from individuals, in many cases that they force to 
interact with? Mr. Walsh, what is the recourse?
    Mr. Walsh. You would hope that it would be like the private 
sector, as we have all received, I am sure, numerous notices 
that our data has been breached, that they would provide some 
assistance, but I am not familiar with what would happen if the 
CFPB were hacked.
    Mr. Timmons. Well, we have had a lot of government data 
breaches. I mean, I do not see huge, hundred-million-dollar 
settlements from the government. We have sovereign immunity. 
You are not allowed to sue the Federal Government. You are not 
allowed to sue the state or local government. I mean, really, 
the recourse is likely people get fired. I mean, is that kind 
of the recourse?
    Mr. Walsh. So, people could be fired. One would hope that 
people would be held accountable through hearings such as this 
today. But I would not want to speculate.
    Mr. Timmons. Well, let us get to the root of the problem. I 
mean, we have servers all over the country that are extremely 
expensive to update. The training necessary to implement best 
practices as it relates to employees accessing data is not 
cheap. I am in the Air Force, and we do these ridiculous 
trainings on-line that is just really the bane of my existence 
when I got to drill.
    But, I mean, the answer is eventually going to be cloud 
migration, and that should save money long-term, once we are no 
longer spending money on maintenance. I see, Mr. Powner, you 
are nodding your head. Is that fair?
    Mr. Powner. Yes. Clearly there could be long-term savings 
going to the cloud, but the thing with these legacy 
applications is during the transition you are running dual 
operations typically, so there is always an investment 
initially with savings down the road.
    We talked about the IRS system. I mean, if we look at the 
individual master file you are going to have to run dual 
operations there for a while, and it is going to result in an 
investment.
    Now long term, are you going to save on maintenance costs 
and those types of things? Yes. I mean, are you going to have 
better security? Yes. But there is going to be some investment 
during that transition that you are going to have to bite the 
bullet.
    Mr. Timmons. I just tried to pay my Federal taxes, and it 
is extremely complicated, the dual factor authentication. It is 
effective. It just requires me to look back at historical 
taxes. If we had something like that during the pandemic for 
either PPP loans or for EIDL loans, or for unemployment claims, 
we would have saved, I do not know, half a trillion dollars?
    So, I mean, we are already seeing the costs of not having--
I would not even call that best practice. That is just basic. 
Dual factor authentication to confirm the user's identity that 
is accessing a government system is so basic that it is 
shocking that we do not have it. And because we did not have it 
at SBA, it cost half a trillion dollars. I mean, any guess what 
it would have cost two years ago, or let us just say before the 
pandemic, three or four years ago, to make sure that SBA used 
dual factor authentication? Probably less than $1 billion. 
Maybe a couple hundred million? What do you think? Mr. Walsh?
    Mr. Walsh. That certainly seems reasonable for a couple 
hundred million.
    Mr. Timmons. So, we could have spent a couple hundred 
million dollars to save half a trillion. And I think that we 
are just seeing the beginning of this. We are going to continue 
to have increasing frequency and degree of breaches or of uses 
where it would have benefited greatly.
    So, I appreciate that you all are here testifying before 
us. This is very important, and we need to keep working on it.
    With that I yield back. Thank you.
    Ms. Mace. Thank you.
    And I would now recognize Mr. Lynch for five minutes.
    Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you for holding 
this hearing, and thank you and the Ranking Member, and thank 
you to our witnesses for your willingness to help the Committee 
with its work.
    So, as the Ranking Member pointed out earlier, we are 
spending about $100 billion a year on cyber systems, although 
80 percent of that, $80 billion, is actually going to maintain 
legacy systems that we are supposed to be converting. Is there 
a system in place where we automatically say, ``OK, this system 
has been in place since 1973, and we are getting rid of it'' or 
is it left up to the individual agency to adopt a program of 
modernization and going to a more robust system?
    Mr. Walsh. So, there is no such system that says just 
because it is old we need to retire it. In fact, just because 
it is old, I think we should do an evaluation, but there may be 
good cases where it does not make sense from a benefit 
perspective or even a cost perspective to retire something just 
because of age.
    Mr. Lynch. Yes. I know I read a report by, I think it was 
the FBI, that said that right now we are outnumbered like 50 to 
1 in terms of--even if we put everybody on cybersecurity in the 
U.S. Government just on China, the number of hackers would 
outnumber us like 50 to 1. That is just with China.
    And I am concerned that if we do not change up the way we 
are doing things here, even the most, I guess, ordinary systems 
are now targets of Chinese hackers, right? They said that they 
actually hacked the Merit Systems Board as well, which 
basically just handles Federal employee complaints and fairly 
mundane issues. But there is so much hacking going on, even 
those more mundane systems that we would not consider as 
threatened or as important as others, they are actually 
targets.
    So, I do not know if we can afford to leave any legacy 
system that is porous in place, and I think it is a sign of 
inattention or lack of priorities that I have been coming to 
these meetings, these hearings, for about 20 years, and yet we 
seem to be going over the same ground again and again. And 
there is no robust system for changing this out, and I am 
searching for a way to make that happen.
    I know it will be painful for some of these agencies. I 
know that in many cases employees might be comfortable with a 
legacy system. They know how that operates. It would require 
them to train themselves on a new system. But I think it is 
necessary for the national security of this Nation.
    And I am just wondering if you have any--I mean, you have 
been dealing with this up front every single day for a long, 
long time. What are your recommendations that we might light a 
fire under some of these people to make them, you know, adopt 
the modernizations that are necessary?
    Mr. Powner. Well, I clearly think there needs to be more 
consistency agency-to-agency on how we tackle legacy issues. 
And you mentioned these major security vulnerabilities, and I 
think Representative Timmons brought up, you know, not being 
able to use multi-factor authentication. Well, many of these 
legacy systems make it difficult to use multi-factor 
authentication. That is a tenet of what we are trying to go 
toward with zero trust, with cybersecurity.
    So, I would start with the legacy systems, and we could 
talk about unmet mission needs, we can talk about high 
maintenance costs. But if you have a security vulnerability, 
that needs to be right at the top of the list. I think a 
prioritization criterion should come from OMB. I am not saying 
Congress needs to come up with the criteria, but I think 
Congress and legislation should direct OMB to have 
prioritization criteria so that we have more consistency, 
Representative Lynch, and would better address the key points 
that you are making.
    Mr. Lynch. Do we have the ability to say, OK, a system that 
is being used by a certain department is not capable of 
delivering zero trust compliance under the President's 
initiative? Is there an ability to rule some of these systems 
out that are not capable of compliance, and get rid of those?
    Mr. Powner. You would have to go to, probably, each 
individual agency and have that discussion with their CIOs and 
CISOs. But the answer is you could do that, yes.
    Mr. Lynch. OK. All right. Thank you for your courtesy, 
Madam Chair. I yield back.
    Ms. Mace. Of course.
    I would now like to recognize Congressman Burlison for five 
minutes.
    Mr. Burlison. Thank you, Chairwoman. I am going to try to 
rapid fire some questions here. I have been here four months, 
so I am just trying to get my head wrapped around how we do IT 
at the Federal level. So, can you give me an idea, do different 
agencies, do they have full control? Do they stand up their own 
IT departments and have their own funding? Do they make 
decisions unilaterally without context?
    Mr. Walsh. So each agency, yes, in the majority of cases, 
has its own IT department, and in addition, agencies that have 
components or bureaus may also have their own bureaus or 
departments.
    Mr. Burlison. And within those you have got--do you have 
programming teams?
    Mr. Walsh. You have programming teams. You have 
contractors. You have CISOs, the whole gamut.
    Mr. Burlison. How many different, of the products that we 
manage, or within the Federal Government, given a particular 
agency--and this may be hard to answer--but how much of it is 
in-house programmed versus vendor purchased?
    Mr. Walsh. So, I know that we would be heavily in favor of 
the government using COTs, commercially off-the-shelf software, 
or GOTs, government off-the-shelf software, but I do not know 
of any specific study that has identified government-wide what 
the mix of contractor-built versus government-built is.
    Ms. Kent. And Kevin, if I might add, sir, to your question. 
It varies agency-to-agency. Some agencies, they significantly 
have a staff that looks over their set of technology products. 
Others do leverage outside sources more significantly.
    And to your first question, each agency is actually charged 
with managing their own technology environment, and those are 
responsibilities that are tasked on the CIO. But the priority 
discussion that we have been having is the head of agency, and 
when it comes to how they operate, that is the responsibility 
of the CIO, but the funding priority and the initiatives--
because many of these technology implementations impact 
operations and they impact mission
    --are an all-of-agency decision. So, those things impact 
the pace of how the various agencies move forward.
    Mr. Burlison. Do any of the agencies decide to outsource 
the entire departments or the sections of IT?
    Ms. Kent. Agencies use services provided as a service, but 
for various different things--we have had cloud discussions, 
you know, multiple times, so that may be an example. But that 
does not absolve them of any of the responsibility for managing 
that technology or managing the risk. That is completely the 
responsibility of the agency, and that is why the choice of 
their partners is so important.
    Mr. Burlison. So, do you find, or is there opportunities 
for, you know, cost savings or economies of scale, where 
different agencies can leverage the same software?
    Mr. Walsh. So, the government does some of that----
    Mr. Burlison. No?
    Mr. Walsh [continuing]. With its Shared Services 
Initiative, where they try to bundle, you know, multiple 
different agencies together.
    Ms. Kent. I am only smiling because one of the Shared 
Services Initiatives was during the time that I served, and we 
were extremely focused on it. It is a perfect example of some 
of this legacy discussion. The mission support services, things 
like payroll and grants management, things that are done, some 
of our financial capabilities, they are done commonly across 
the entire Federal Government and governed by the same law. 
Yet, we have 124 time-and-attendance entry systems across the 
government.
    Mr. Burlison. Yes, ridiculous.
    Ms. Kent. So, do have opportunity, but migrating is 
expensive and risky. And so that is why, you know, we have seen 
slowness in moving to some of those centralized capabilities 
and----
    Mr. Burlison. And I imagine these agencies, they do not 
want to give up the power that they have over this particular 
software. That is what I have seen in large-scale companies.
    Ms. Kent. Yes, sir.
    Mr. Burlison. You have got different silos that they just 
want to control that silo.
    But my question to you is, since we are in the positions 
that we have, can we implement policy that forces that 
integration and that economy of scale?
    Ms. Kent. I think there are certainly opportunities for 
that, and you looked at shared services as one. And we have a 
list of legacy systems----
    Mr. Burlison. And then before my time is up I wanted to 
ask, you know, I remember studying the CHAOS report from the 
1990's, project management. Most IT projects are nothing like 
construction projects in that within IT there is a significant 
failure rate, cost overruns, over time, over budget. Around 45 
percent of projects are successful. What is the success rate 
within the Federal Government, across the board?
    Mr. Walsh. So, I cannot give you an exact number on what 
that is right now. We have not done that work. But I do think 
that the advent of modern techniques to do software development 
has helped lower that number, things like agile software 
development, where you can hopefully, if you are going to fail, 
fail sooner, without wasting billions of dollars.
    Ms. Kent. Sir, I would add that the projects that are under 
the Technology Modernization Fund, there have only been two 
that have not hit their timeline, and there have been zero that 
had cost overruns, because those are being managed using a more 
comprehensive and modern project process.
    Mr. Burlison. OK. Thank you.
    Ms. Mace. Thank you.
    I will now recognize Mr. Langworthy for five minutes.
    Mr. Langworthy. Thank you, Chairwoman Mace.
    Legacy IT systems continue to plague both our state and our 
Federal Governments, and this was made very evident by the 
challenges that my home state of New York faced in the 
Department of Labor during the COVID pandemic. The Department 
struggled to issue payments in a timely and efficient manner 
due to its reliance on an outdated technology. And even more 
so, it issued an estimated $11 billion in either improper 
payments or fraudulent payments.
    Despite ongoing efforts to modernize, that Department still 
faces significant hurdles due to legacy complications.
    Ms. Kent and Mr. Walsh, the Cyber Security Strategy paints 
a pretty dire picture when it comes to the elevated cyber risks 
we have in the Federal Government due to all of the legacy IT 
systems at our agency levels. Now specifically, you know, what 
do agencies need to do to address the legacy IT problem, and 
how can we, as a government, accelerate the migration to cloud-
based services?
    Mr. Walsh. So, to address the legacy IT problem I think 
first we need to figure out where it is. Every agency needs to 
have a good understanding of what their systems should be 
doing, evaluate them, see if they meet the mark, and if they do 
not, maybe it is time to think about that retirement or 
replacement.
    To the example you referenced where the State Department of 
Labor had troubles issuing payments for its unemployment 
insurance, I think that was a case of unanticipated capacity. 
During COVID, they had to suddenly ramp up, which, as you 
pointed out, cloud computing, where you can buy capacity on 
demand, is a lot easier to absorb that massive influx of 
capacity that may be unplanned for.
    So, I think migrating to more modern data platforms would 
be another step that you could take to address that.
    Ms. Kent. I would only add to that, sir, making it a 
priority. And you heard the example of unanticipated capacity 
needs, but moving into that environment was also not funded, 
and had not been funded because there was not a view that that 
capacity was going to be needed. New York was not alone, with 
other states who kind of had that same approach.
    So, a plan that continues to look forward and take 
advantage of modern technology capabilities that gives you 
scale and resilience should be a path that not only are we on 
at the Federal agencies, but also our state and local 
government, you know, partners that deliver those services.
    Mr. Langworthy. Mr. Walsh, in the past few years GAO has 
written numerous reports regarding shared services, including 
the significant government cost savings of consolidating HR, 
payroll, financial services across the Federal Government, many 
of which rely on legacy and outdated technology systems.
    Can you provide a brief update on how agencies are doing in 
terms of modernization and consolidation with respect to 
implementation goals and milestones for agencies to transition 
from one provider to another?
    Mr. Walsh. So, I do not have that information with me 
today, sir. I can take that question for the record, though.
    Mr. Langworthy. Thank you. Thank you very much.
    And Ms. Kent and Mr. Walsh, what should Congress be doing 
to address the challenge of IT modernization besides holding 
hearings like this? Are there specific legislative proposals 
that we should be thinking about, such as requiring agencies to 
inventory legacy IT or submit modernization plans?
    Mr. Walsh. Absolutely, and I think a good starting point 
would be OMB's 2016 draft guidance that was never finalized. If 
that were finalized, I think that would be a great starting 
point. In our 2018-2019 report, we also flagged some of the 
most important legacy systems in need of modernization. I think 
those would be a great starting point, although I would hope 
the agencies have been tracking and updating that list since 
then.
    Ms. Kent. And, sir, as I referenced in the opening 
statement, some agencies do have plans for modernization, and 
at times they have been submitted, and there is not a realism 
about the budget because in many cases, while you are 
supporting a legacy system and building a modern system, you 
are duplicating your costs. So, being realistic about that 
process.
    Other agencies have not even built a plan, a realistic 
plan, that has cost estimates and an anticipated timeline. So, 
that is an opportunity for Congress to push harder.
    Mr. Langworthy. And just in my last remaining time here, 
are there regulatory or policy hurdles that make a transition 
to a cloud-based service challenging for the government?
    Ms. Kent. There are--yes and no. All agency CIOs are 
accountable for the risk and the performance for their 
particular agency. So, as another Member asked a question, you 
cannot outsource your risk. So, in making those choices there 
are services available--it is still incumbent on that 
particular agency to do work to ensure that that is not a risky 
environment. Are the services available and are they available 
commercially? In most cases, yes.
    Mr. Walsh. Just to add, in addition to the risk as you 
making the go/no-go decision on the modernization, making sure 
that you are comfortable with the risks that the contractor or 
cloud service provider is taking to protect the government's 
data is something else that we need to keep focused on, making 
sure that whether that is citizens, you know, taxpayer data, 
whether that is data from the Department of Education on 
Federal student loans, or IRS, we need to make sure that those 
data are adequately protected.
    Mr. Langworthy. Thank you for your time and your testimony 
today. I yield back, Madam Chair.
    Ms. Mace. Thank you.
    And I would now like to recognize Mr. Edwards, from North 
Carolina, for five minutes.
    Mr. Edwards. Thank you, Madam Chair. To our witnesses, 
thank you for your time this afternoon and for your service to 
help out our great country.
    Ms. Kent, one of the things that you mentioned earlier that 
really interests me because, while serving in the North 
Carolina Senate, I served on our state's IT Committee, and this 
issue was very much at the forefront, particularly because so 
many of our systems were built on COBOL, and in a lot of cases 
we had a hard time finding people alive that could work on 
COBOL.
    But you mentioned a situation where an agency converted 1 
million lines of COBOL code to Java. I have never heard of that 
practice before. So, can you tell us a little bit, how 
practical is that, just plugging it in and letting it 
translate? How reliable is it? How expensive is it? Do you save 
any money when you use that process relative to just starting 
out with a blank hard drive?
    Ms. Kent. I am going to try to answer all of those 
questions, and I am going to start with is there a process and 
are there reliable tools. Much like Chairwoman Mace, I started 
my career in financial services, and there are definitely tools 
that are capable of making those types of transitions, with 
these points. It was 7 million lines of COBOL into 1.2 million, 
approximately, of Java. The tools that were used and tested in 
that process got about 70 percent of it right. So, there still 
had to be some hands-on work with people who understand the 
business processes of the agency to address those things that 
are not an easy fit.
    There are many automation tools today that are proven, have 
been proven by multiple industries, that can perform at a 
similar level. The expense, you can save because you now did 
not go hire all those COBOL programmers that everyone is 
fighting over, and you used a technology tool, but you cannot 
bypass the fact that you have to have skilled resources that 
understand the business and mission processes in those agencies 
to take it the last mile and manage the implementation.
    Mr. Walsh. If I may, sir, there is also currently the 
development of artificial intelligence, AI, and some of the 
tools that the Chairwoman mentioned earlier, the impact that 
those are going to have on the ability of the government to 
manage its legacy IT is going to be very interesting to watch 
in the coming months. That may be a significant force 
multiplier, making it easier to do those kinds of efforts, 
where you translate old code that no one can maintain or update 
anymore, and you use the AI to translate it into something that 
is easier to work with.
    Mr. Edwards. Thank you for that. And so, let us be 
realistic. What we need to do to modernize is appropriate more 
money. I mean, it is going to take resources. However we choose 
to verbalize it, that is what it boils down to. And we do not 
have unlimited resources. We do have to be responsible with the 
taxpayers' dollars. And so, I foresee that there would need to 
be some level of prioritization.
    Do you know, has there been a process put in place to 
prioritize the agencies where we begin? If so, where do we find 
that prioritization, and if there is not, how do we go about 
prioritizing the agencies that we need to fund first to 
modernize?
    Mr. Walsh. So, I would add a nuance there that I would not 
focus on modernizing an agency. I would identify specific 
systems that can bring the most benefit or are the most risky 
and prioritize funding toward them. But I think the process to 
identify all of the legacy systems, and then prioritize, is one 
that we can focus on, and legislatively, maybe, a solution for 
you to explore.
    Ms. Kent. And sir, I might add that more focus first, 
because in some cases modern technology is actually going to 
save money, effort, or improve the mission of the agency. And 
an example may be, in one particular department we modernized 
all the forms and processing and an exchange process between 
three different Federal agencies, and what that meant in that 
efficiency is that we did not have backlog and we did not have 
calls coming into their support centers.
    So, we actually saved money. It did not appear in the IT 
budget, but the agency itself saved significant money and 
delivered on their mission much better.
    Mr. Edwards. Thank you. Madam Chair, I yield.
    Ms. Mace. Thank you, Mr. Edwards.
    This concludes our hearing this afternoon. In closing, I 
want to thank our panelists once again for their testimony 
today. I know there are many different tools and applications 
that they are using in the private sector and public sector for 
converting COBOL to Java. Thank you for bringing up that 
example.
    I know folks that use GitHub Copilot to program. They get 
about 70 percent of their code from it and then they have got 
to manually do the rest of it, as you mentioned in your 
example. But I guess about a year ago Copilot also announced 
that they could take COBOL code and make it into Java using a 
couple of tools that they have, but there are others, 
CloudFrame, there are many different other tools. So, thank you 
for using that as an example.
    And as I said in my opening statement, we are going to be 
introducing legislation to help improve modernization efforts 
with IT legacy systems. This hearing has reinforced this sort 
of need for these kinds of bills and legislation, so we 
appreciate your feedback. And we look forward to continuing our 
conversation as we work together, and to do that, and putting 
that together.
    Before we adjourn, I ask unanimous consent to enter into 
the record the U.S. Chamber of Commerce statement and letter. 
Without objection, so ordered.
    Ms. Mace. And with that, without objection, all Members 
will have five legislative days within which to submit 
materials and submit additional written questions for the 
witnesses, which will be forwarded to the witnesses for your 
response.
    If there is no further business, and without objection, we 
are adjourned.
    [Whereupon, at 3:16 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

                                 

