
 - CISA 2025: THE STATE OF AMERICAN CYBERSECURITY FROM CISA'S PERSPECTIVE

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]



 
 CISA 2025: THE STATE OF AMERICAN CYBERSECURITY FROM CISA'S PERSPECTIVE

=======================================================================

                                HEARING

                               before the

                            SUBCOMMITTEE ON
                    CYBERSECURITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE
                               PROTECTION

                                 of the

                     COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
                        HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

                    ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

                             FIRST SESSION

                               __________

                             APRIL 27, 2023

                               __________

                            Serial No. 118-9

                               __________

       Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security
                                     

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

                                     

        Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov

                         __________                             
  
             U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE 
 52-983            WASHINGTON : 2023
                              
                               
                               
                               

                     COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

                 Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee, Chairman
Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi, 
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                  Ranking Member
Michael Guest, Mississippi           Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           Eric Swalwell, California
August Pfluger, Texas                J. Luis Correa, California
Andrew R. Garbarino, New York        Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island
Nick LaLota, New York                Glenn Ivey, Maryland
Mike Ezell, Mississippi              Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         Robert Garcia, California
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Dina Titus, Nevada
Elijah Crane, Arizona
                      Stephen Siao, Staff Director
                  Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
                       Natalie Nixon, Chief Clerk
                     Sean Jones, Legislative Clerk
                                 ------                                

      SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION

                Andrew R. Garbarino, New York, Chairman
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           Eric Swalwell, California, Ranking 
Mike Ezell, Mississippi                  Member
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee (ex     Robert Menendez,  New Jersey
    officio)                         Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi 
                                         (ex officio)
               Cara Mumford, Subcommittee Staff Director
           Moira Bergin, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director
                    Alice Hayes, Subcommittee Clerk
                    
                            C O N T E N T S

                              ----------                              
                                                                   Page

                               Statements

The Honorable Andrew R. Garbarino, a Representative in Congress 
  From the State of New York, and Chairman, Subcommittee on 
  Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Protection:
  Oral Statement.................................................     1
  Prepared Statement.............................................     2
The Honorable Eric M. Swalwell, a Representative in Congress From 
  the State of California, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on 
  Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Protection:
  Oral Statement.................................................     3
  Prepared Statement.............................................     4
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress 
  From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on 
  Homeland Security:
  Prepared Statement.............................................     6

                                Witness

Ms. Jen Easterly, Director, Cybersecurity and Infrastructure 
  Security Agency (CISA):
  Oral Statement.................................................     7
  Prepared Statement.............................................     9

                                Appendix

Questions for Jen Easterly From Chairman Andrew R. Garbarino.....    41
Questions for Jen Easterly From Ranking Member Eric Swalwell.....    43
Questions for Jen Easterly From Honorable Robert Menendez........    44


 CISA 2025: THE STATE OF AMERICAN CYBERSECURITY FROM CISA'S PERSPECTIVE

                              ----------                              


                        Thursday, April 27, 2023

             U.S. House of Representatives,
                    Committee on Homeland Security,
                         Subcommittee on Cybersecurity and 
                                 Infrastructure Protection,
                                                    Washington, DC.
    The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:03 p.m., in 
room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Andrew R. 
Garbarino (Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
    Present: Representatives Garbarino, Gimenez, Ezell, Lee, 
Luttrell, Swalwell, Jackson Lee, Carter, and Menendez.
    Also present: Representative Clarke.
    Mr. Garbarino. The Committee on Homeland Security, 
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Protection, 
will come to order.
    The purpose of this hearing is to receive testimony from 
Jen Easterly, director of Cybersecurity and Infrastructure 
Security Agency, or CISA.
    I now recognize Ranking Member Swalwell for the purposes of 
seeking unanimous consent.
    Mr. Swalwell. Thank you, Chairman.
    I ask unanimous consent that the gentlelady from New York, 
Ms. Clarke, be permitted to participate in today's hearing.
    Mr. Garbarino. Without objection, so ordered.
    I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
    Welcome back for our second subcommittee hearing of the 
Congress. Last month, we hosted industry leaders to give their 
perspective on the state of American cybersecurity and 
particularly how the Cybersecurity Infrastructure Security 
Agency, or CISA, has developed since its creation 5 years ago. 
I'm glad that we will hear directly from CISA director Jen 
Easterly on her views on CISA's evolution and where it needs to 
grow and mature by 2025.
    Director Easterly and I have had a fantastic working 
relationship since I started as Ranking Member of the 
subcommittee last Congress. I look forward to continuing our 
strong bipartisan relationship this Congress.
    In our last hearing, there were some common themes from our 
witnesses that I hope to further explore with Director Easterly 
this afternoon.
    First, we learned that CISA must work with the industry and 
interagency partners to ease compliance, the compliance burden 
that industry faces from duplicative regulation. It's clear 
that our Nation must increase resilience to cyber risk across 
the board, particularly within our critical infrastructure 
sectors, but we must find the right balance between regulatory 
burden and improving security outcomes.
    We also heard a lot about one of CISA's newest initiatives, 
the Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative, or JCDC. We heard that 
JCDC has the potential to be a value-add to the private sector, 
but additional transparency around its mission and processes 
would benefit both the JCDC and industry.
    Finally, and perhaps most foundationally, we heard about 
the need for robust cybersecurity work force. We need not only 
enough people but the right people with the right skills and 
the right jobs. This is one of my top priorities this Congress, 
and I'm looking forward to hearing Director Easterly's 
perspective on how CISA can best contribute to the development 
of our national cyber work force.
    This hearing is timely. It comes as we are evaluating the 
President's fiscal year 2024 budget request. CISA is requesting 
$3.1 billion, $145 million increase over fiscal year 2023 
enacted--fiscal 2023 enacted funding level. The dialog we have 
during this hearing will help inform our committee's review of 
the budget, particularly the new program CISA proposes within, 
including the evolution of the National Cybersecurity 
Protection System.
    I think I speak for all Members on this dais when I say 
that we want CISA to succeed. Its mission is too important to 
fail. It is our responsibility to ask pointed but productive 
questions about CISA's stewardship of the resources and 
authorities Congress has given it. As I said in our last 
hearing, Congress intends to be a partner to CISA to ensure the 
agency meets its full potential.
    Director Easterly, I look forward to your testimony today, 
and I thank you for being here.
    [The statement of Chairman Garbarino follows:]
           Prepared Statement of Chairman Andrew R. Garbarino
    Welcome back for our second subcommittee hearing of the Congress. 
Last month, we hosted industry leaders to give their perspective on the 
state of American cybersecurity and particularly how the Cybersecurity 
and Infrastructure Security Agency, or CISA, has developed since its 
creation 5 years ago. I am glad that we will hear directly from CISA 
Director Jen Easterly on her views on CISA's evolution and where it 
needs to grow and mature by 2025. Director Easterly and I have had a 
fantastic working relationship since I started as Ranking Member of 
this subcommittee last Congress--I look forward to continuing our 
strong bipartisan relationship this Congress.
    In our last hearing, there were some common themes from our 
witnesses that I hope to further explore with Director Easterly this 
afternoon.
    First, we learned that CISA must work with industry and interagency 
partners to ease the compliance burden that industry faces from 
duplicative regulation. It's clear that our Nation must increase 
resilience to cyber risk across the board, particularly within our 
critical infrastructure sectors. But, we must find the right balance 
between regulatory burden and improving security outcomes.
    We also heard a lot about one of CISA's newest initiatives: the 
Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative, or JCDC. We heard that JCDC has the 
potential to be a value-add to the private sector but additional 
transparency around its mission and processes would benefit both JCDC 
and industry.
    Finally, and perhaps most foundationally, we heard about the need 
for a robust cybersecurity workforce. We need not only enough people 
but the right people with the right skills, in the right jobs. This is 
one of my top priorities this Congress and I am looking forward to 
hearing Director Easterly's perspective on how CISA can best contribute 
to the development of our national cyber workforce.
    This hearing is timely. It comes as we are evaluating the 
President's fiscal year 2024 budget request. CISA is requesting $3.1 
billion, a $145 million increase over the fiscal year 2023 enacted 
funding level. The dialog we have during this hearing will help inform 
our committee's review of the budget, particularly the new programs 
CISA proposes within, including the evolution of the National 
Cybersecurity Protection System.
    I think I speak for all the Members on this dais when I say that we 
want CISA to succeed. Its mission is too important to fail. It's our 
responsibility to ask pointed but productive questions about CISA's 
stewardship of the resources and authorities Congress has given it. As 
I said in our last hearing, Congress intends to be a partner to CISA to 
ensure the agency meets its full potential. Director Easterly, I look 
forward to your testimony today and thank you for being here.

    Mr. Garbarino. I now recognize the Ranking Member, the 
gentleman from California, Mr. Swalwell, for his opening 
statement.
    Mr. Swalwell. Thank you, Chairman.
    Welcome, Director. It was just 12 hours ago that the 
Chairman and I were here early in the morning with our 
colleagues voting. I don't think we voted the same way on many 
of the amendments yesterday, but on this issue and your 
success, there is no daylight between the Chairman and I and my 
colleagues. Your success is America's success in this space, 
and that is something we are rooting for and want to enable.
    I also represent an East Bay California district that is 
home to tech giants like TriNet and Workday, but also an 
emerging cybersecurity insurance company called Cowbell Cyber, 
and have worked with all of them to protect, not just large 
companies, but small- and medium-size companies from emerging 
threats.
    As the Chairman said, CISA is at an inflection point, and 
Congress made CISA an operational component of DHS 5 years ago. 
Since then, its budget has nearly doubled, and Congress has 
provided it with a range of new authorities, from mandatory 
cyber incident reporting to persistent threat hunting on 
Federal networks to Cyber Century. CISA has ambitiously taken 
on new responsibilities to meet the demands of an evolving 
threat landscape, building trusted relationships with new 
stakeholders in the process.
    For that, I and our team commend CISA for its proven 
ability to dynamically respond to evolving threats ranging from 
election security, to open-source software vulnerabilities, to 
the Shields Up campaign. As it relates to election security, I 
hope to hear an update from CISA on some recent successes; this 
launch promising new initiatives, including the National Risk 
Management Center and the Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative, a 
collaboration that so many outside organizations, private-
sector folks, are asking how do we get in, how do we 
participate, which to me means you are a victim of your own 
success in that regard in that there's high interest in growing 
and expanding the ability to share information and collaborate 
to take on our threats. All of these are worthy efforts. I 
support them and am committed to their success.
    Today I look forward to hearing how CISA will continue to 
deliberate in the new work it takes on and the commitments it 
makes to our partners. As more stakeholders become aware of 
CISA and its capacity, they have placed more and more demands 
on its resources. CISA cannot be, as you know, everything to 
everyone, and it certainly does not have the resources to boil 
the ocean.
    Becoming the powerhouse cybersecurity and critical 
infrastructure defense agency, CISA has the potential to be--
requires--what CISA has the potential to be requires clear 
strategic direction and determined leadership. I have every 
confidence that Director Easterly has both, and I will be 
interested in learning more about your vision for CISA moving 
forward.
    I'm also interested, as I referenced, in the future of 
JCDC. Stakeholders have applauded JCDC as an innovative, 
flexible tool for CISA to gather and fuse threat information, 
foster real-time collaboration, and push out security practices 
through initiatives like its Shields Up campaign.
    Over the past year-and-a-half, CISA has expanded JCDC's 
focus to include open-source software security and protecting 
high-risk communities by journalistic or civil society 
organizations. Although these are worthwhile efforts, it's 
unclear what criteria JCDC is using to select which areas to 
focus on, which organizations to partner with, and not how 
these activities are tied to the JCPOs original purpose of 
streamlining, cyber planning, and operational collaboration.
    I look forward to candid conversations about defining 
JCDC's core functions, how to ensure JCDC partners are involved 
in decisions about its future, and how it can bring a more 
proactive posture to CISA's defense activities. Formalizing the 
answers to these questions through authorization will ensure 
JCDC has enduring value for years to come.
    On a related note, I understand that CISA is in the process 
of revamping the National Risk Management Center, and look 
forward to learning more about plans to make CISA's--to make it 
CISA's analytical hub.
    Finally, it's critically important that CISA do more to 
secure industrial control systems and other operational 
technology. I appreciate CISA's support for my legislation that 
we passed into law last year, the Industrial Control Systems 
Cybersecurity Training Act, which will solidify the existence 
of meaningful training courses to ensure OT remains at the 
forefront of our security focus.
    As I am sure you'll agree, CISA must develop that work 
force now, not 5 years from now, while also doing more to 
promote threats--to understand threats to OC systems, push out 
its cyber performance goals, and grow programs like Cyber 
Century that monitor our OT threats.
    Thank you again to the Chairman for convening us here 
today.
    Thank you, Director Easterly, and your team who's worked 
with us, for your testimony, and I look forward to a robust 
conversation about attacking the threats that we face.
    I yield back.
    [The statement of Ranking Member Swalwell follows:]
         Prepared Statement of Ranking Member Eric M. Swalwell
                             April 27, 2023
    Good afternoon. I want to thank my friend, Chairman Garbarino, for 
holding today's hearing on the future of the Cybersecurity and 
Infrastructure Security Agency, and echo his appreciation to Director 
Easterly for her participation today.
    CISA is at an inflection point.
    Congress made CISA an operational component of DHS nearly 5 years 
ago.
    Since then, its budget has nearly doubled and Congress has provided 
it a range of new authorities--from mandatory cyber incident reporting, 
to persistent threat hunting on Federal networks, to CyberSentry.
    And CISA has ambitiously taken on new responsibilities to meet the 
demands of the evolving threat landscape, building trusted 
relationships with new stakeholders in the process.
    I commend CISA for its proven ability to dynamically respond to 
evolving threats, ranging from election security to open source 
software vulnerabilities to the Shields Up campaign.
    It has launched promising new initiatives, including the National 
Risk Management Center and the Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative, aimed 
at maturing how the Government understands systemic risk and 
operationalizes partnerships across agencies and with the private 
sector.
    All of these are worthy efforts. I support them, and I am committed 
to their success.
    At the same time, at this critical juncture, CISA must be 
deliberate in the new work it takes on and the commitments it makes to 
its partners.
    As more stakeholders have become aware of CISA and its capacity, 
they have placed more and more demands on its resources.
    CISA cannot be everything to everyone, and it cannot boil the 
ocean.
    Becoming the powerhouse cybersecurity and critical infrastructure 
defense agency CISA has the potential to be requires clear strategic 
direction and determined leadership.
    I have every confidence that Director Easterly has both, and I will 
be interested in learning more about her vision for CISA moving 
forward.
    I am also interested in discussing the future of JCDC.
    Stakeholders have applauded JCDC as an innovative, flexible tool 
for CISA to gather and fuse threat information, foster real-time 
collaboration, and push out security practices through initiatives like 
its ``Shields Up'' campaign.
    Over the past year-and-a-half, however, CISA has expanded JCDC's 
focus to include, open-source software security or protecting high-risk 
communities like journalistic or civil society organizations.
    Although these are worthwhile efforts, it is unclear what criteria 
JCDC is using to select which areas to focus on, which organizations to 
partner with (and for what reason), and how these activities are tied 
to the JCPO's original purpose of streamlining cyber planning and 
operational collaboration.
    I look forward to candid conversations about defining JCDC's core 
functions, how to ensure JCDC partners are involved in decisions about 
its future, and how it can bring a more proactive posture to CISA's 
defensive activities.
    Formalizing the answers to these questions through authorization 
will ensure JCDC has enduring value for years to come.
    On a related note, I understand that CISA is in the process of 
revamping the National Risk Management Center, and I look forward to 
learning more about plans to make it CISA's analytical hub.
    Like JCDC, I believe NRMC would benefit from authorization and hope 
to work with you on that effort as you finalize the restructuring 
process.
    Finally, it is critically important that CISA do more to secure 
industrial control systems (ICS) and other operational technology (OT).
    These systems deliver indispensable services--the water we drink, 
the energy that powers our home, the gas we put in our cars, the goods 
we manufacture, and countless others.
    They are also increasingly connected to the internet, uniquely 
vulnerable, and require specialized expertise to secure--and we don't 
have nearly enough OT security professionals in the workforce today.
    CISA needs to be developing that workforce now, not 5 years from 
now--while also doing to more to understand threats to OT systems, push 
out its Cyber Performance Goals, and grow programs like Cyber Sentry 
that help to monitor OT threats.
    Thank you, again, Director Easterly, for your testimony.
    I yield back.

    Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Ranking Member Swalwell.
    I do not see the Chairman or the Ranking Member of the full 
committee. So other Members of the committee are reminded that 
opening statements may be submitted for the record.
    [The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
             Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
                             April 27, 2023
    Good afternoon. I want to thank Chairman Garbarino and Ranking 
Member Swalwell for organizing this important hearing and Director 
Easterly for coming to testify before the subcommittee today.
    The subject of today's hearing is of particular importance to me, 
since I was one of a small group of legislators who spent years working 
on legislation to remake CISA's predecessor agency--a small, under-
resourced headquarters component known as the National Protection and 
Programs Directorate--into the operational cyber powerhouse we know 
today.
    Since Congress established CISA 4\1/2\ years ago, the agency has 
developed a broad range of capabilities to defend critical 
infrastructure from cyber and physical threats.
    I am proud of the Homeland Security Committee's bipartisan work to 
ensure CISA has the authorities and resources necessary to fulfill its 
broad and incredibly important mission, and I have been impressed with 
how Director Easterly has utilized these authorities to build out 
CISA's capabilities and visibility.
    As CISA continues to mature as an agency, it is essential that it 
maintain a clear vision of the agency's role.
    In particular, as the agency determines its priorities, CISA must 
ensure that both cyber and physical threats continue to receive the 
necessary attention.
    I was concerned that the President's budget request included 
proposed cuts to vital programs within the Infrastructure Security 
Division.
    The distinction between cyber and physical threats is not always as 
clear as it may seem, and CISA's ability to coordinate security efforts 
against all threats is part of what gives it a unique role in defending 
critical infrastructure.
    Continuing to balance investments across all divisions will produce 
the most security benefits.
    To that end, I am also interested to hear more about CISA's plans 
for the National Risk Management Center, which if utilized properly, 
has the potential to become a vital center for risk analysis, serving 
CISA, other Federal agencies, and critical infrastructure more broadly.
    The Biden administration's new National Cybersecurity Strategy, 
released earlier this year, lays out ambitious goals for improving the 
state of our Nation's cybersecurity.
    The Strategy provides clear objectives for Federal agencies to 
implement as they carry out their cybersecurity mission.
    CISA's role as the national coordinator for critical infrastructure 
security and resilience will make it a central player in bringing 
together the Federal Government, State and local governments, and the 
private sector in carrying out the Strategy.
    But, considering the broad range of stakeholders that CISA serves, 
it risks being pulled in too many directions.
    I look forward to hearing more about how CISA plans to contribute 
to the Strategy's implementation as the administration develops more 
detailed plans for implementing its strategic objectives, and how CISA 
will prioritize its own goals.
    As CISA continues to grow as an agency, I appreciate that it is 
working hard to fill the many vacancies in its ranks.
    I urge CISA to use the significant hiring it plans to undertake in 
the coming year to improve the diversity of its own workforce, just as 
it must prioritize efforts to educate and train a more diverse cyber 
workforce nationally.
    Additionally, expanding the number and diversity of voices CISA 
hears from as it consults with outside stakeholders, both formally and 
informally, will make CISA better able to address the broad range of 
threats our Nation faces.
    I hope as the Cybersecurity Advisory Committee continues its work 
going forward that its makeup will be more inclusive of the number of 
women and people of color with cybersecurity expertise whose 
perspective CISA would benefit from hearing.
    Thank you again to the Chair and Ranking Member for their on-going 
work to strengthen our Nation's cybersecurity and to Director Easterly 
for her tireless work at CISA.
    I yield back.

    Mr. Garbarino. I am pleased to have Director Easterly 
before us today to discuss this very important topic. I ask 
that our witness please rise and raise their right hand.
    [Witness sworn.]
    Mr. Garbarino. Let the record reflect that the witness has 
answered in the affirmative.
    Thank you. Please be seated.
    I would now like to formally introduce our witness, Jen 
Easterly. She's the director of the Cybersecurity and 
Infrastructure Security Agency at DHS. She was nominated by 
President Biden April 2021, and unanimously confirmed by the 
Senate on July 12, 2021. That's no easy feat.
    As director, Director Easterly leads CISA's effort to 
understand, manage, and reduce risk to the cyber and physical 
infrastructure Americans rely on every day.
    Before serving in her current role, she was the head of 
Firm Resilience at Morgan Stanley, responsible for ensuring 
preparedness in response to business-disrupting operational 
incidents and risks. Director Easterly also has a long tenure 
in public service, to include two tours at the White House.
    Director, thank you for being here today. I now recognize 
you for 5 minutes to summarize your opening statement.

    STATEMENT OF JEN EASTERLY, DIRECTOR, CYBERSECURITY AND 
             INFRASTRUCTURE SECURITY AGENCY (CISA)

    Ms. Easterly. Thank you so much, Chairman Garbarino, 
Ranking Member Swalwell, Members of the subcommittee, for the 
opportunity to appear before you today. I'm really excited to 
share what we're doing to ensure that the CISA of today and of 
tomorrow is the agency that our Nation deserves.
    As America's cyber defense agency, CISA leads the national 
effort to understand, manage, and reduce risk to the cyber and 
physical infrastructure that Americans rely on every day. Since 
CISA was established in 2018, the threats we face have become 
more complex, more geographically dispersed, and they affect 
the entire cyber ecosystem, from Federal civilian government 
agencies, to businesses large and small, to State and local 
governments and, ultimately, the American people.
    CISA's mission has never been more urgent, and it's a sense 
of urgency that each of us at CISA feels every day to ensure 
that we are making the best use of the resources and 
authorities that Congress has generously provided to us over 
the past several years in demonstrating a clear return on 
investment to both you and to the American people.
    As you're well aware, the past 2 years have been pretty 
intense, from the Solar Wind supply chain compromise to the 
ransomware attack on Colonial Pipeline, from vulnerabilities 
exploited in Microsoft Exchange servers to vulnerabilities 
mitigated in Log4j software, from our Shields Up campaign to 
safeguard critical infrastructure from Russian malicious cyber 
activity, to efforts across the Nation to help State and local 
election officials secure election infrastructure during the 
2022 midterms.
    CISA, along with our partners, has been front and center in 
each. We've aggressively leveraged all of the authorities that 
we've been granted to enhance our operational visibility into 
Federal civilian networks through persistent hunting to conduct 
planning and operations with our industry partners, including 
our operational technology and industrial control system 
partners through the Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative; to 
identify vulnerable systems through our admin subpoena process 
and notify our partners to prevent them from being exploited; 
to serve as both a sector risk management agency for eight 
sectors and one subsector; and, more broadly, as the national 
coordinator for critical infrastructure security and 
resilience, working with our sister SRMAs to reduce cross-
sector risk.
    Even as we've maintained the highest operational tempo in 
an increasingly complex and demanding threat environment, we've 
been growing and maturing as a new agency, co-creating a 
culture of collaboration to enable us to attract and retain the 
best talent in the Nation and, indeed, growing that talented 
work force by nearly 1,000 new teammates in the last couple of 
years; meticulously executing our rapidly-expanding budget to 
ensure we remain responsible stewards of taxpayer dollars.
    Last September, we published our first-ever strategic plan, 
which outlines our ambitious goals through 2025 across four key 
pillars: Cyber defense, risk reduction and resilience, 
operational collaboration, and agency unification.
    I greatly appreciate this committee's steadfast work to 
help CISA achieve these goals. I also appreciate that the 
tenets outlined in the CISA 2025 plan, from optimizing the 
organization, growing an expert cyber work force, enhancing 
operational visibility, advancing our capabilities, harnessing 
partnerships, and measuring outcomes to determine progress are 
all well-aligned. So our efforts together can advance a shared 
vision for cybersecurity in America.
    We're aggressively executing this plan, working with our 
trusted partners, to enable a collective defense of our 
critical infrastructure, to include working with those target-
rich, cyber-poor entities like small businesses and school 
districts and water facilities and hospitals and local election 
offices, to ensure that they have the resources and tools they 
need to improve their cybersecurity and build resilience.
    Needless to say, there is much, much more to be done to 
protect and defend our Nation's critical infrastructure, from 
driving adoption of secure-by-design principles in our 
technology products, to championing corporate cyber 
responsibility in every board room, to implementing a 
groundbreaking cyber incident reporting regime, and much more 
to be done to mature our great team and optimize our value to 
our partners, with perhaps no partner more fundamental to our 
success than you all.
    We would not be here today without tremendous bipartisan 
Congressional support, especially from this committee and this 
subcommittee. We are very grateful for your commitment to 
ensuring that CISA is armed with the talent, the resources, and 
the authorities necessary to meet our mission of reducing risk 
to the critical infrastructure Americans rely on every day. 
This is truly a no-fail mission. Thanks to your support, we are 
thriving.
    While we're proud of what we've accomplished to date, we 
recognize the criticality of continued support in terms of 
authorities and budget to ensure that we sustain this progress. 
We must and we will continue pushing hard, under your oversight 
and with your support, to strengthen this agency and, by 
extension, the security and resilience of our Nation.
    Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today. I 
look forward to your questions.
    [The prepared statement of Ms. Easterly follows:]
                   Prepared Statement of Jen Easterly
                             April 27, 2023
    Chairman Garbarino, Ranking Member Swalwell, and Members of the 
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify regarding the 
priorities of the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency 
(CISA) in the coming year.
    In today's interconnected society, our Nation faces a wide array of 
serious risks from many threats, all with the potential for significant 
consequences that can impact our critical national functions. These 
functions are built as ``systems of systems'' with complex designs, 
numerous interdependencies, and inherent risks. While this structure 
allows for significant gains in efficiency and productivity, it also 
allows opportunities for nation-state actors and criminals, foreign and 
domestic, to undermine our national security, economic prosperity, and 
public health and safety, creating cascading effects across our Nation.
    As the Nation's cyber defense agency, CISA is charged with leading 
the national effort to understand, manage, and reduce risk to the cyber 
and physical infrastructure Americans rely on every hour of every day. 
Securing our Nation's critical infrastructure is a shared 
responsibility requiring not just a whole-of-Government, but a whole-
of-Nation approach. CISA is only able to accomplish our mission by 
building collaborative, trusted partnerships across all levels and 
branches of government, the private sector, academia, and the 
international community. CISA's Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative 
(JCDC), for the first time, enables the Government, the private sector, 
and U.S. international partners to come together to develop joint cyber 
defense plans and enable real-time information sharing.
    As part of this mission, CISA plays two key operational roles. 
First, we are the operational lead for Federal cybersecurity, charged 
with protecting and defending Federal Civilian Executive branch (FCEB) 
networks (e.g., the ``.gov''), in close partnership with the Office of 
Management and Budget, the Office of the National Cyber Director, and 
agency chief information officers and chief information security 
officers. Second, we serve as the coordinator of a national effort for 
critical infrastructure security and resilience, working with partners 
across Government and industry to protect and defend the Nation's 
critical infrastructure. In both roles, CISA leads incident response to 
significant cyber incidents in partnership with the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation (FBI) and the intelligence community.
    I am truly honored to appear before this committee today to discuss 
CISA's critical mission and our exceptional workforce that works 
tirelessly every day to fulfill it. Since being sworn in as director, I 
continue to be impressed with the talent, creativity, and enthusiasm of 
the dedicated CISA employees I am entrusted to lead. I have the best 
job in Government.
                     cisa 2023 and 2024 priorities
    Looking forward into the coming year, CISA will remain focused on 
strengthening our Nation's cyber and physical defenses. We will work 
closely with our partners across every level of government, in the 
private sector, and with local communities to protect our country's 
networks and critical infrastructure from malicious activity and will 
continue to share timely and actionable information, intelligence, and 
guidance with our partners and the public to ensure they have the tools 
they need to keep our communities safe and secure and increase 
nationwide cybersecurity preparedness.
    Overall, we continue to make critical investments in our mission-
enabling activities and functions that will mature the agency and 
better support the execution of our operational capabilities. CISA's 
Mission Support program provides enterprise leadership, management, and 
business administrative services that sustain day-to-day management 
operations for the agency. This is essential to ensure we can hire a 
diverse and talented workforce and execute our missions with the 
technology and speed that keep us ahead of our adversaries.
    CISA is also focused on the work we must do to implement the Cyber 
Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act (CIRCIA). CISA must 
ensure that it has the staffing, processes, and technology capabilities 
in place to successfully implement and utilize information provided 
through CIRCIA. We must engage in additional outreach efforts regarding 
the notice of public rulemaking and the planning efforts required to 
educate covered entities and CISA stakeholders on the cyber incident 
reporting requirements, reporting protocols, and reporting methods, as 
well as voluntary reporting options. In addition to the rulemaking 
process, CISA must ensure we can receive, manage, analyze, secure, and 
report on incidents reported under CIRCIA, maturing our current ability 
to receive and analyze incident reports, manage incidents, coordinate 
with and notify the interagency, and implement incident data protection 
functions required by CIRCIA.
                             cybersecurity
    The Cybersecurity Division (CSD) spearheads the national effort to 
ensure the defense and resilience of cyber space. CSD will continue to 
build the national capacity to detect, defend against, and recover from 
cyber attacks. CSD will continue working with Federal partners to 
bolster their cybersecurity and incident response postures and 
safeguard FCEB networks that support our Nation's essential operations. 
CSD will also continue our critical work partnering with the private 
sector and State, local, territorial, and Tribal (SLTT) governments to 
detect and mitigate cyber threats and vulnerabilities before they 
become incidents.
    New efforts at CSD will include initiating the Joint Collaborative 
Environment (JCE), which will enable CSD to develop an internal 
analytic environment that provides more efficient analysis of mission-
relevant classified and unclassified data through automation and 
correlation to identify previously-unidentified cybersecurity risks. 
The JCE enables CSD to fulfill its mission and better integrate cyber 
threat and vulnerability data that CISA receives from our Federal, 
SLTT, and private-sector stakeholders, and rapidly work with those 
stakeholders to reduce associated risk. To effectively execute our role 
as the operational lead for Federal civilian cybersecurity, CSD must 
maintain and advance our ability to actively detect threats targeting 
Federal agencies and gain granular visibility into the security state 
of Federal infrastructure. To effectuate these goals, CSD continues to 
mature the National Cybersecurity Protection System (NCPS) and Cyber 
Analytics Data System (CADS).
    In the coming year, portions of the NCPS will transition to the new 
CADS program with intrusion detection and intrusion prevention 
capabilities remaining under the legacy program. CADS will provide a 
robust and scalable analytic environment capable of integrating mission 
visibility data sets, visualization tools, and advanced analytic 
capabilities to cyber operators. CADS tools and capabilities will 
facilitate the ingestion and integration of data as well as orchestrate 
and automate analysis that supports the rapid identification, 
detection, mitigation, and prevention of malicious cyber activity.
    Together with the Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM) 
program, these programs provide the technological foundation to secure 
and defend FCEB departments and agencies against advanced cyber 
threats. CDM enhances the overall security posture of FCEB networks by 
providing FCEB agencies and CISA's operators with the capability to 
identify, prioritize, and address cybersecurity threats and 
vulnerabilities, including through the deployment of Endpoint Detection 
and Response (EDR), cloud security capabilities, and network security 
controls.
    CSD will continue to advance the CyberSentry program, which is a 
voluntary partnership with private-sector critical infrastructure 
operators designed to detect malicious activity on the Nation's 
highest-risk critical infrastructure networks. CyberSentry provides 
best-in-class commercial technologies that allow both CSD analysts and 
each partner organization to rapidly detect threats that attempt to 
move from an organization's business network to impact industrial 
control systems. While CyberSentry is intended only for the most at-
risk or targeted critical infrastructure entities, CSD intends to 
deploy capabilities to additional critical infrastructure partners to 
meet significant demand for the program based upon operational 
successes achieved to date.
                         integrated operations
    The Integrated Operations Division (IOD) coordinates CISA 
operations at the regional level and delivers CISA capabilities and 
services to support stakeholders in preparing for, mitigating, 
responding to, and recovering from incidents that impact critical 
infrastructure. Additionally, IOD monitors and disseminates cyber and 
physical risk and threat information; provides intelligence context to 
support decision making; and performs agency-designated Emergency 
Support Functions. IOD will continue to enable seamless and timely 
support to CISA stakeholders across the Nation, meeting our partners 
where they are in communities in every State.
                        infrastructure security
    CISA's Infrastructure Security Division (ISD) leads and coordinates 
national programs and policies on critical infrastructure security, 
including conducting vulnerability assessments, facilitating exercises, 
and providing training and technical assistance. ISD's mission focuses 
on efforts such as reducing the risk of targeted violence directed at 
our Nation's schools, communities, houses of worship, and other public 
gathering locations. In addition, ISD leads programmatic efforts to 
secure our Nation's chemical infrastructure through implementation of 
the Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards (CFATS) regulation, 
authority for which is expiring on July 27, 2023.
                        emergency communications
    CISA's Emergency Communications Division (ECD) enhances public 
safety communications at all levels of government across the country 
through training, coordination, tools, and guidance. ECD leads the 
development of the National Emergency Communications Plan (NECP) and 56 
State-wide Communications Interoperability Plans to maximize the use of 
all communications capabilities--voice, video, and data--available to 
emergency responders and to ensure the security of data exchange. ECD 
also assists local emergency responders to communicate over commercial 
networks during natural disasters, acts of terrorism, and other 
significant disruptive events. The Emergency Communications program 
supports Nation-wide sharing of best practices and lessons learned 
through facilitation of SAFECOM and Emergency Communications 
Preparedness Center governance bodies.
                         stakeholder engagement
    The Stakeholder Engagement Division's (SED) activities focus on 
fostering collaboration, coordination, and a culture of shared 
responsibility for national critical infrastructure risk management 
with Federal, SLTT, and private-sector partners in the United States, 
as well as international partners. SED also executes CISA's roles and 
functions as the Sector Risk Management Agency (SRMA) for 8 of the 
Nation's 16 critical infrastructure sectors and will lead coordination 
with SRMAs, the broader national voluntary critical infrastructure 
partnership community, and across all sectors to ensure the timely 
exchange of information and best practices. In partnership with the 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), SED will continue 
implementing the State and Local Cybersecurity Grant Program, to 
include providing subject-matter expertise and leading program 
evaluation efforts to ensure State and local entities can access grant 
resources to enhance cybersecurity resiliency and reduce cybersecurity 
risk.
                    national risk management center
    The National Risk Management Center (NRMC) develops analytic 
insights to identify and advance risk mitigation opportunities that 
improve national security and resiliency across critical infrastructure 
sectors. These analytic products support investment and operational 
decision making throughout the public and private sectors. The NRMC 
will continue two critical efforts related to SRMAs and National 
Critical Function (NCF) Analytics in the coming year.
    First, the NRMC will continue to expand risk analysis and risk 
management across high-priority critical infrastructure sectors. This 
risk analysis provides insight into cross-sectoral risk and significant 
sector-specific risks to support all of CISA in routinely identifying 
and prioritizing focused risk-management opportunities to create 
tangible risk reduction outcomes. Second, the NRMC will continue our 
NCF efforts to enhance analytic capabilities, including methodology and 
framework development to identify and characterize critical 
infrastructure interdependencies within and across NCFs. This includes 
applied analysis to meet specific analytic requirements in the 
infrastructure community to enable CISA to understand consequences that 
extend beyond a single sector.
                               conclusion
    I am honored to represent my dedicated teammates at CISA who work 
indefatigably in support of our mission to understand, manage, and 
reduce risk to our cyber and physical infrastructure. The risks we face 
are complex, geographically-dispersed, and affect a diverse array of 
our stakeholders, including Federal civilian government agencies, 
private-sector companies, SLTT governments, and ultimately the American 
people. However, CISA stands ready to carry out these critical mission 
imperatives.
    Before I close, I would like to take a moment to recognize the 
Homeland Security Committee's and this subcommittee's strong support 
for CISA. For myself, and on behalf of our CISA workforce, thank you 
for your support. As one team unified behind our shared mission, we 
will continue to operate in an efficient and cost-effective manner. 
There is much work to be done and I look forward to working with you 
during the 118th Congress to continue strengthening this agency, and by 
extension, the security and resilience of our Nation's networks and 
critical infrastructure.
    Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today, and I 
look forward to your questions.

    Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Director Easterly.
    Members will be recognized by order of seniority for their 
5 minutes of questioning. An additional round of questioning 
may be called after all Members have been recognized.
    I'm not going to call myself first because my Vice Chair 
has another hearing she has to go to and I know she's got some 
very interesting questions, so I would like to yield.
    I recognize Ms. Lee from Florida for 5 minutes.
    Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Director 
Easterly, for being here today.
    In my former role as Florida's secretary of state, I had 
the opportunity, of course, to work with you; your predecessor, 
Director Krebs; your team over at CISA, in working to secure 
election infrastructure. So I'd like to begin there with a 
couple of questions about that sector and the work of CISA in 
the elections arena.
    Starting out, would you please describe for the committee 
what CISA does in collaboration with State and local election 
officials as it relates to cyber-specific risk assessments, and 
then also, where appropriate, the deployment of hunt and 
incident response teams to State and local elections offices? 
Would you please describe those services, when they are 
utilized, and whether you see the need for them increasing or 
decreasing?
    Ms. Easterly. Yes. Thanks so much. Thank you for your 
partnership and your leadership on this issue in particular.
    So as you know, we've been in this role now since 2017, and 
we have been learning constantly about the demands of election 
security--election infrastructure security. Really, I would say 
refining our relationships with State and local officials to 
ensure that we are meeting their demands. As I think you know, 
from 2017 to 2020, our focus was very much on those cyber 
services, from vulnerability scanning to remote vulnerability 
assessments, to penetration testing, to helping with incident 
response. I think actually we are in a much better place in 
terms of cyber hygiene and cybersecurity with our election 
infrastructure.
    One thing that we found, however, going through 2022 was 
that the threats were very different now. Not only was there 
cyber, but there was also physical security issues, there were 
insider issues, and there were issues of concern around foreign 
influence and disinformation. So while we continue to provide 
those cybersecurity services, we are actually expanding our 
full range of services based on the demands that we're getting 
from State and local officials.
    So one of the things that we did earlier this year was set 
up a full road map along five lines of effort, and we provided 
it to our State and local election officials. A full range of 
those cybersecurity services that you mentioned, Congresswoman, 
but also physical security, insider security. Then we're really 
pushing hard to get beyond the State and the State election 
directors, so we can get down to communities and counties and 
parishes and towns, because we see those are the entities that 
are truly rich as a target but cyber poor.
    So the other thing we did is we put together a place mat of 
services so that there was no mystery in terms of what we 
offer. We made that available to all of our constituents using 
our field forces that we've grown almost double over the past 
several years.
    Ms. Lee. On that subject, I know one of the challenges that 
faces CISA and many other partners across sectors as it relates 
to technology and cyber is recruitment and retention of 
appropriate talented, trained people. I know CISA launched the 
Cyber Talent Management System back in 2021, with the effort, 
the intention to be to recruit and retain the appropriate 
professionals you need for your work force.
    How has CTMS been working? You mentioned the expansion of 
your team. Have you been able to effectively and efficiently 
recruit? How does your fiscal year 2024 request support the use 
of that operation and recruitment?
    Ms. Easterly. Yes. Thank you for asking the question. That 
was, as you probably know, about 7 years in the making. So 
actually implementing it has been something that's been a real 
project that we've continuously had to look at how it's working 
and ensure it truly streamlines our ability to bring on more 
talent.
    I think we're at about 80 people with the Cyber Talent 
Management System and some really extraordinary talent. At this 
point in time, we continue to use our Title V authorities, our 
normal authorities to bring on talent. We are hoping to use 
CTMS more aggressively this year. But I will tell you, I think 
the recruiting that we've done to date is a real success story: 
516 people last year, we're on pace to exceed that, our 
retention level is between 7 and 8 percent. It's not just 
quantity. We are bringing in some of the best talent across the 
country.
    While our work force has grown every year, the request that 
we put into the budget only adds very small increment, I think 
maybe 10 people. So what we're doing now is trying to get down 
to about 90 percent total, and then, of course, we'll focus on 
retention. But to be frank, I am OK if somebody comes to work 
at CISA for 3 to 5 years and then goes off to a hospital or a 
power company or a bank to help them with their critical 
infrastructure security, because at the end of the day, this is 
really about collective cyber defense, and we need to work 
together hand-in-hand.
    Ms. Lee. Mr. Chairman, my time has expired. I yield back.
    Mr. Garbarino. The gentlelady yields back.
    I now recognize the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr. Carter, 
for 5 minutes.
    Mr. Carter. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.
    Director Easterly, thank you very much for being here. 
Thank you for the incredible work that you do.
    In my home State of Louisiana and around the Nation, far 
too many higher education institutions are experiencing data 
breaches. What steps is CISA taking to protect the privacy and 
integrity of our institutions and combat critical 
infrastructure cybersecurity issues?
    Ms. Easterly. It's a real--it's a real scourge across the 
country. One of the focus areas that we did, actually, based on 
being asked by the Congress to take a look at the K-12 
Cybersecurity Act, was we spent a lot of time putting together 
a guide for K-12 schools and school districts across the 
country. We worked with a lot of experts to ensure that it was 
a guide that schools which were part of those target-rich, 
resource-poor entities could actually take advantage of. So we 
created this guide, very simple steps about things that can be 
done to prevent data breaches and ransomware attacks. We've 
seen a lot of that.
    Then what we're doing is working with our field forces to 
actually do outreach across the country to schools and school 
districts to ensure that they understand the resources, the 
free resources that we provide, and they can take advantage of 
them so they can drive down risk. So we've aggressively started 
that outreach at the beginning of fiscal year 2023, so that at 
the end of the day, we can measure success by seeing whether we 
were able to drive down some of these events that 
unfortunately----
    Mr. Carter. How does that success measure?
    Ms. Easterly. So what we want to do----
    Mr. Carter. Are you seeing success marginally?
    Ms. Easterly. So we see success based on the feedback we're 
getting. The problem is, is we don't know the universe of these 
threats at this point in time. This is why the CIRCIA, the 
Cyber Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act, is so 
fundamentally important, because we'll finally get an idea of 
the universe of ransomware incidents. For right now, it is a 
lot of the feedback that we get directly saying, because you 
came and spent time with us, we implemented these things and 
it's helped us improve our cybersecurity.
    Mr. Carter. Tell me about HBCUs. We know that HBCUs have 
come under attack. I'm an alumnus of Xavier University. Xavier 
University was hit with a substantial cyber attack that 
crippled the university and its system for some time. I know 
that Howard University and many others, likewise, in almost 
sequence, at one point there were like eight HBCUs, I think, 
that were hit in succession.
    Can you share with us any plans or actions that you've 
taken since that to protect or encourage or enhance the ability 
to make those institutions safe going forward, or safer?
    Ms. Easterly. Yes. Thanks for asking the question. So we've 
actually done a lot of work with HBCUs. Unfortunately, much of 
that work is about the bomb threats that they have received, to 
ensure that their physical security and that they were prepared 
for that. At the same time, however, we have been working as 
part of our outreach to target-rich, resource-poor entities to 
help them understand those steps that they can take to increase 
their baseline.
    I don't have the information specifically on our outreach 
with respect to cyber for HBCUs, Congressman, but I'm happy to 
get back to you on that.
    Mr. Carter. OK.
    Ms. Easterly. The one point I would make is, a recent 
program that we just implemented had some real stunning near-
term success, and some of it is with institutions of higher 
learning, and that's the Pre-Ransomware Notification 
Initiative. We'll get tips from security researchers and from 
industry about ransomware getting put down on a system. Before 
it actually gets activated, we can actually notify that entity 
and they can do something about it before they have a really 
bad day. Many of the targets that we've been notifying are K-12 
and institutions of higher education. So I'm happy to get you 
more details.
    Mr. Carter. With the minute, 36 seconds left, I want to ask 
you quickly about drones. We know that we see the increased use 
of drones. We visited the Southern Border this past weekend. We 
know that drone traffic is incredible and a real impediment to 
protecting the Southern Border. We also know that critical 
infrastructure, pipelines, utility companies, are crime scenes, 
and drug trade. Because my understanding is now that the drones 
are bigger, they're fuel-operated, so they can go longer, 
faster, and they have the capacity to carry up to 50, 60 
pounds, which makes them very, very dangerous.
    Can you share with us what you can about what you guys are 
doing relative to critical infrastructure in the drone usage?
    Ms. Easterly. It's a real concern of ours as well. We have 
a section that's part of our infrastructure security that 
focuses on physical security that is taking a hard look at this 
issue. We've done a few assessments to date, and we're looking 
to update them, working with our partners. But I've spent time, 
in particular up in New York, where there's a real concern from 
our folks on the ground of nefarious use of some of these 
capabilities.
    So I'd be happy to follow up with you and get more 
information on the kind of things we're doing and get your 
feedback on what might be more helpful to your constituents.
    Mr. Carter. If there's anything that you can share that we 
can share with them in the way of grants, in the way of 
resources, in the way of things that they could be doing to 
better protect or arm you with facts that are going on, whether 
it's at the university level, at the plants or crime scenes or 
other critical infrastructures, that there may be resources 
that they may not be available or aware of that we could make 
available to them would be very----
    Ms. Easterly. Yes. I'd love to follow up on that 
conversation in particular.
    Mr. Carter. Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, I yield 
back.
    Mr. Garbarino. The gentleman yields back.
    I now recognize myself for 5 minutes of questioning.
    Director Easterly, I'd like to start my questions today by 
asking you about a fundamental issue: Our cyber work force 
challenge. CISA is obviously not the only place where the work 
force gap is an issue, and there are many agencies in the 
Federal Government and companies across the private sector that 
are working to improve the national cyber work force. You know, 
we've talked about, and you just said in your answers to Ms. 
Lee, how you have been able to make some hires recently. That's 
very exciting news.
    But I want to know, what do you see as CISA's role in 
developing the national cyber work force both public and 
private?
    Ms. Easterly. Yes. Thanks for the question, Chairman. So I 
look at this as, first of all, we've got to make sure CISA has 
what we need. Then there's, of course, the Federal work force, 
I think probably some 35,000, focus there. In the country 
itself 700,000. Cyber is a borderless space, if you look at the 
big number around the world with our allies, 3.5 million.
    So I'd say a couple of things. First of all, with respect 
to the country, I do--just because we serve as America's cyber 
defense agency, I do think we play an important role in helping 
to build that pipeline, because at the end of the day, I want 
to make sure CISA is successful in the next 25, 50, 100-plus 
years. That, frankly, has to start from the youngest of ages.
    So one of the things that we've done based on a grant that 
we received, the Cyber Education Training and Assistance 
Program, we've given that grant to the Cyber Innovation Center, 
and they make curriculum available to K-12. So that if you are 
giving this curriculum to help some of our more younger members 
understand that, hey, this cyber thing is not that scary, it is 
really interesting, I want to be a part of it, that can 
actually start that pipeline. So I think that's one really 
important aspect of it.
    We also do training, retraining for the Federal work force, 
for those who might want to get into cyber. Then we give grants 
to organizations, like the NPower and the Cyber Warrior 
Foundation, and those are underserved communities. So we're 
looking using a myriad of tools. We're also working, of course, 
across the Federal Government with NIST, with the Office of the 
National Cyber Director that's working on the more fulsome 
cyber work force strategy.
    Mr. Garbarino. I appreciate that and all the hard work that 
CISA's doing. It's definitely--as you said, it's borderless. I 
called it the third border the other day, but I got yelled at 
by my staff for saying that, so I think I'm not allowed to say 
it anymore.
    So I do actually want to focus on something that was 
brought up by one of our witnesses from--she was from the Bank 
Policy Institute. She testified that, Financial Services 
Sector, the cyber work force is spending 30 to 40 percent of 
their time on regulatory compliance. The SEC--and I just met 
with a major bank CISA last week who said by the end of this 
year when some other regulations come out it is probably going 
to be closer to 50 percent.
    The SEC proposed a rule that seems to conflict with the 
requirements and the Congressionally-mandated Cyber Incident 
Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act. So I'm wondering--we 
had Chairman Gensler in front of the Financial Services 
Committee last--2 weeks ago. What steps did you and Chairman 
Gensler take to harmonize the proposed SEC rule at the Cyber 
Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act rule making?
    Ms. Easterly. Yes. Thank you for the question. Having spent 
4.5 years at Morgan Stanley, and I know Heather and very 
sympathetic to those views, we don't want to create burden or 
chaos. What we want to do is ensure that we get the information 
in a streamlined way.
    So, of course, we've had discussions across the Government. 
As you know, Chairman, one of the things in CIRCIA was, of 
course, the Cyber Incident Reporting Council, which is working 
to figure out how to best harmonize among the various asks that 
we have from the private sector.
    I think the good news is, in the legislation that you all 
gave us, it very specifically accounts for any crossover. So 
very specifically, legislation says that if there's a 
requirement to report to another agency and they have a 
reporting time line that's similar to ours, if they have 
substantially similar information, then you can sign a 
memorandum of agreement so you don't have to report twice. We 
are working to ensure that that is a streamline process. I 
think that is really important, again, from a harmonization 
perspective.
    Mr. Garbarino. I appreciate that. I know the Council's 
supposed to be giving us a report and we are waiting for that.
    I did want to follow up. Have you spoken to Chairman 
Gensler? From his testimony, it made it sound like you two 
speak quite often.
    Ms. Easterly. We absolutely have spoken. I think we are 
both trying to accomplish the goal of ensuring that we get the 
information that we need. His role is different than mine, of 
course. The reason why we need the information is so we can 
render assistance, and also we can use that to help protect the 
wider ecosystem. So I'm sure we'll end up in a--I hope we'll 
end up in a good place.
    Mr. Garbarino. I hope so too. I'll just say, 50 percent of 
your time on having somebody spend 50 percent of their time on 
compliance, you know, that means 50 percent of the time they're 
not on defense----
    Ms. Easterly. One hundred percent.
    Mr. Garbarino. So I appreciate that. I yield back.
    I recognize the gentlelady and former Chairwoman of this 
committee, Ms. Clarke from New York.
    Ms. Clarke. Good afternoon. Let me begin by first thanking 
our Chairman Garbarino and Ranking Member Swalwell for 
permitting me to waive on to the subcommittee for holding this 
very important hearing on the state of our Nation's 
cybersecurity posture and CISA's role and perspective. Thank 
you, gentlemen.
    Let me also thank Director Easterly for your leadership and 
service and for joining us today.
    When I chaired this subcommittee last Congress, I often 
remarked that there is a disconnect, an imbalance, if you will, 
between the scope of CISA's mission versus its authorities. 
Congress expects CISA to carry out one of the broadest, most 
ambitious missions in the Federal cyber space. But its 
authorities pale in comparison to many of its components and 
counterparts.
    At least until recently, in the 117th Congress, we worked 
across the aisle to pass legislation to empower CISA within the 
interagency, grow its visibility into cyber threats, and make 
sure CISA can require, not just request, that companies report 
cyber incidents to CISA for the benefit of the broader 
ecosystem. So I for one am ready to start seeing these results.
    So, Director Easterly, my first question is about CIRCIA. 
First, is CISA on track to meet the rulemaking deadline and 
statute? What would it take for CISA to move faster?
    Ms. Easterly. Thank you very much. Great to see you again, 
Congresswoman.
    I think few people in this country want me to move faster 
than me. You know, and we did want an accelerated process, but 
we were told to go through the full rulemaking process, and we 
are.
    You know, you point out an authorities perspective. We 
don't do law enforcement, we don't do intel, we are not a 
military agency. We're a voluntary agency at the end of the 
day. So we felt that the consultative process was really 
important, particularly given some of the concerns that the 
Chairman articulated, so we did 27 listening sessions, 17 of 
those were virtual. We did a request for information. We 
received 130 comments.
    We used all of that to help create the rule, which actually 
now exists in draft, and we are going to have to go through the 
process. But that rule should go out, the notice of proposed 
rulemaking should go out on time in March 2024. Then the final 
rule is on schedule 18 months later, September 2025.
    Please trust me, I'm trying to do everything I can to 
accelerate that process, but we want to get it right because it 
is so important and so groundbreaking.
    Ms. Clarke. Yikes. My next question is, what is CISA doing 
in the mechanism to make sure that it can hit the ground 
running when these rules go into effect?
    Ms. Easterly. So it's a really important question, and some 
of this was reflected in our budget, because this is not a 
trivial task. We need to make sure that we have the people and 
the technical infrastructure in place to be able to take these 
huge amounts of reports that we're going to get, to ingest 
them, to triage them, to analyze them, to respond to them, and 
then to use them in an anonymized way to enable us to actually 
get that information out to protect the larger sector. So that 
is a huge amount of work, not only just the administrative 
aspects of the rule making, but actually all of the technical 
infrastructure in place across the agency. So we are in the 
process of leveraging the funds that we've received and will 
hopefully receive to be able to create that.
    Ms. Clarke. So I want to thank you, because in responding 
to Chairman Garbarino, you spoke about the regulatory 
harmonization. That's a really key component. That's the only 
way we are going to keep our private-sector partners engaged 
and on-board and really feeling as though they're being heard.
    Ms. Easterly. Yes, ma'am.
    Ms. Clarke. My next question to you is whether CISA has an 
approach for Federal regulators, like the SEC or FCC, about 
entering into MOUs to share incident reports.
    Ms. Easterly. Yes, 100 percent, and that's what I 
mentioned. But I think this is a really good part of the 
legislation. I mean, specifically it exempts the statute-exempt 
companies from reporting to CISA if three conditions are met: 
If it's similar information, similar time frame, and if the 
other agency agrees to put an MOU in place. So we are very 
happy to do that. We just need to negotiate each of those MOUs, 
and our intent is to do that between the notice of public 
rulemaking and the final rule.
    Ms. Clarke. Very well. Well, before I close, I just want to 
reiterate how important it is that CISA continue to engage with 
stakeholders and hear outside perspectives about how to make 
the rules as smart, effective, and tailored as possible to the 
goals of CIRCIA. So thank you very much.
    Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
    Ms. Easterly. Thank you, ma'am.
    Mr. Garbarino. The gentlelady yields back. Thank you for 
coming. We love having you back here.
    I now recognize Mr. Ezell from Mississippi for 5 minutes of 
questioning.
    Mr. Ezell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good seeing you this 
morning--this afternoon, Ms. Clarke and other Members.
    Director Easterly, thank you for being here to participate 
today in this very important hearing. I'd like to talk about 
CISA's partnership with the FBI, especially considering the 
Joint Ransomware Task Force recent work to take down these bad 
actors.
    I understand that JCDC is working to update the National 
Cyber Incident Response Plan, which will also address this 
partnership. This updated plan, how do you think CISA and the 
FBI will work together to address incident responses?
    Ms. Easterly. Thank you for the question. I have to say 
that, you know, in my almost 30 years in Government, I have 
never seen such a great partnership. I say that really 
sincerely. Some of that was owing to personalities, but I think 
it is very much a result of the mission, it's a function of the 
mission.
    So we partner very closely with FBI. In fact, the 
legislation, the Joint Ransomware Task Force was actually--said 
CISA will lead. We made the decision, we said that doesn't 
really make a lot of sense. We need to make sure that FBI is 
with us, linked arms, and so we made them a co-lead, because 
it's really important. As you know, we have the asset 
response--responsibilities and FBI has the threat response. So 
we work together very symbiotically in everything we do to 
ensure that, when there's an incident, we can be there to help 
respond and FBI can be there to render assistance but to also 
investigate.
    So I'm incredibly pleased at the quality of that 
relationship, both at the Federal level, sir, but also with 
local law enforcement. That's something that our field forces 
on the ground have developed really close working relationships 
over the past couple years.
    Mr. Ezell. Thank you for that. That is just so important 
working with, not only the FBI but with our local law 
enforcement, which is my background.
    So CISA is requesting $98 million for requirements with a 
cyber incident reporting for critical infrastructure. Can you 
talk just a little bit about how the agency plans to spend this 
money?
    Ms. Easterly. Yes, absolutely. Thank you for that. So as I 
was saying, this is one of the most important groundbreaking 
things that I think the Congress has done for cybersecurity, 
because for the first time, we will understand much more about 
the universe of incidents and attacks; and we really don't. 
Anybody that says it's going up, it's going down, is completely 
anecdotal. So for the first time, we'll have a better picture 
of that.
    But it is not a trivial endeavor to set up the 
infrastructure to enable us to ingest those reports, to triage 
them, to analyze them, to enable a response, and then to use 
them in an anonymized way that protects the victim but be able 
to provide that as warning to the rest of the sector in the 
ecosystem to help them drive down risks.
    So that $98 million is both people, but it's also technical 
infrastructure that will enable us to do all of those things, 
from case management to stakeholder relationship management to 
a threat intel platform to an analysis capability. That's what 
we are putting in place now, sir, and hope that we get the 
additional funding to allow us to do this the right way. It's 
important for the Nation.
    Mr. Ezell. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
    Mr. Garbarino. The gentleman yields back.
    I now recognize Mr. Menendez from New Jersey for 5 minutes 
of questioning.
    Mr. Menendez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Ranking 
Member. Thank you for bringing us together here, second time in 
this room in less than a couple of hours. So it's just good to 
see you all in such a good mood.
    Director Easterly, thank you for joining us today. You 
know, I'm really thankful to be on this subcommittee. I think 
about cybersecurity as often as I can. I'm also on the 
Transportation and Infrastructure Committee here, and serve for 
the Eighth Congressional District in New Jersey, which is home 
to what security experts call the most dangerous 2 miles in the 
country, and that was really because of the physical assets and 
from a physical security perspective. But increasingly, I think 
about all of the challenges from a cybersecurity one. So I'm 
fortunate to have you here today and thankful for the work that 
you do.
    I guess starting off, you know, I think about it a lot but 
you deal in it every day. Probably the most significant 
position that we have in our country.
    How do you feel about America's preparedness from a 
cybersecurity perspective addressing, guarding against cyber 
attacks today in 2023, on a scale of 1 to 10, let's say?
    Ms. Easterly. I think we have made vast strides, even just 
over the last couple of years. I think there is much work to be 
done, to be very frank. In particular, my big concern is 
nation-state adversaries, in particular China.
    Mr. Menendez. Yep.
    Ms. Easterly. If you read the--which I'm sure you did--the 
intelligence community annual assessment that specifically 
talks about actions that China may take to disrupt our critical 
infrastructure in the event of a conflict, I am motivated every 
day on the urgency of ensuring that the country is as prepared 
as possible to withstand but really to be resilient too. At the 
end of the day, I think our ability to prevent is very, very 
difficult. We have to be able to mitigate and to recover and to 
have the resilience to get our Nation back up and running if 
there is a major attack.
    Mr. Menendez. I appreciate that. When you engage with 
different stakeholders from industry, you know, government 
actors, what is their perception of the risk that cybersecurity 
or cyber threat poses to all of us, either from municipalities 
who may see their tax department hacked, to infrastructure or 
operators of various infrastructure systems, transportation 
systems? Where do you see across the board in a blended sort-of 
average on a scale of 1 to 10?
    I'll let you off, because I'm thankful to have you here, 
and I won't make you share with us a specific number. But, you 
know, I'm just trying to gauge what the perception is out there 
of this threat and how serious people are taking it, because we 
need to take it. This is, in my opinion, one of the most 
critical threats to the well-being of our Nation.
    Ms. Easterly. Yes. I agree with you, and I think it's 
improving. It's improving because of Colonial Pipeline.
    Mr. Menendez. Yep.
    Ms. Easterly. It's improving because of the scourge of 
ransomware. You know, ransomware has become, sadly, a kitchen-
table issue and, therefore, we are making cybersecurity and 
cyber hygiene a kitchen-table issue. It's not where it needs to 
be, but it's much better because of those things. So we are 
working now with our field force day in/day out with businesses 
large and small with some of these entities that weren't really 
thinking about their cybersecurity, and telling them, these are 
the basics that you need to do. Because it's not--when you're 
doing the basics, you can actually deal with the vast majority 
of the kind of threats that you would get from a cyber criminal 
organization.
    Mr. Menendez. You know, definitely let us now how we can 
help amplify that message, right? You know, when we do small 
business tours, right, we are generally talking about, you 
know, tax credits to small businesses, right. But, like, we 
should be talking about cybersecurity as well when we're 
visiting, you know, all these different institutions, small- 
and medium-sized businesses, companies in our districts.
    But you're sort-of alluding to the challenge that I'm sure 
gives you a lot of concern, that gives me a lot of concern, is 
that we're admittedly not where we need to be. The way I see 
this threat, especially when you talk about nation-state 
adversaries, right, because it's not just China; it's Russia, 
it's Iran. They are serious about having this ability to target 
our various on-line components, especially our infrastructure, 
which concerns me.
    But the thing that keeps me up sometimes at night, because 
a lot of things on this job keep me up at night, not my friends 
here, this cybersecurity subcommittee is great. But the reality 
is that the speed of a threat and the way in which it can 
develop is exceedingly fast. As we do in this country, we're 
thoughtful, but that means that we're not as quick as our 
adversaries may be.
    What can we do here to enable you, to enable your partners 
and various stakeholders to not just be constantly playing 
catch-up, which is going to be harder and harder to do the more 
compounding that this challenge becomes, but what can we do to 
potentially get ahead in the not too distant future?
    Ms. Easterly. Yes. Thank you for asking the question. It's 
a really, really important one.
    First, in terms of how you can help, to help amplify our 
message, I think, Chairman, you've done that before in terms 
of, you know, I'm a big fan of multifactor authentication. So I 
think, Congresswoman, you have as well. So I would welcome all 
of you to help us get that message out. That's one thing.
    The other thing is, we have done cybersecurity roundtables 
in some of your districts, and we would love to do more. So if 
that's something we can do to sit down with your constituents, 
please let us know. We've got field forces.
    Now, to your larger question, I think it's exactly the 
right one, at the end of the day what we are doing as a status 
quo can help make us more resilient, but I do not think it's 
sufficient or sustainable. I think we need to take a different 
approach, and this is one of the things we've been doing a lot 
of work on.
    First and foremost, we need to ensure that the technology 
that underpins the critical services and functions that 
Americans rely on every day is built secure, secure by design 
with a limited number of vulnerabilities, and secure by default 
with things like multifactor authentication, built in from the 
start. We have, because of misaligned incentives, basically 
allowed innovation--and we love innovation--but innovation 
should not trump safety and security in a world where we all 
rely on tech. So that's a really important message, and I'd 
love to talk more about it at a separate time.
    The second thing is we need to make sure that every leader, 
every CEO, every board room is embracing corporate cyber 
responsibility as a matter of good governance. Incredibly 
important that that not get delegated to the IT people at a 
CISO, but that CEOs see it as their responsibility.
    Then, finally, we need to continue pushing hard on 
persistent operational collaboration, the kind of things that 
we're building with the Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative. 
That's about a default to share on malicious activity, knowing 
that a threat to one is a threat to all. It's about a coequal 
partnership between Government and industry, with reciprocal 
expectation of value-add and transparency where the private 
sector doesn't have to worry about punitive sanction because 
they share information. Then getting rid of the friction. It 
has to be a frictionless experience. We have to have shared 
analytics, shared platforms. That's what we are building with 
our joint collaborative environment and our cyber analytic data 
services.
    So those three things are different in kind. I believe it's 
those kind of things that will really enable us to get ahead of 
this very difficult threat.
    Mr. Menendez. Chair, I appreciate your generosity on time. 
I yield back.
    Mr. Garbarino. I thought is was a very important question. 
I really wanted that on the record. So the gentleman yields 
back.
    I now recognize my colleague from Texas, Mr. Luttrell, for 
5 minutes of questioning.
    Mr. Luttrell. It's what's the best part about going last. 
Everybody asked the questions that I was going to ask.
    Thank you, Mr. Menendez, that was mine. I've been prepping 
that for 2 weeks.
    Mr. Menendez. I had been prepping it for 3 weeks.
    Mr. Luttrell. All right. Always an overachiever.
    Mr. Menendez. Don't worry, you're not last.
    Mr. Luttrell. I mimic my colleague from California, Mr. 
Swalwell's statement. You are the leading edge. You're the next 
phase of combative frontier in the protection of our countries, 
the cyber space. We'll no longer fight wars the way that my 
colleagues and I did in the military with bombs, planes, and 
guns. It's you. So thank you for taking and shouldering that 
weight.
    To drive a point home real quick, as far as when Mr. 
Menendez asked what we can do, I think we just need to stay out 
your way and give you the autonomy that you need. Understanding 
that in the cyber space, when it comes to threat and risk, we 
are so siloed, and that is an issue.
    Are you having success in breaking down those silos when it 
comes to multidepartment coordination?
    Ms. Easterly. Yes, it's a great question. I think one of 
the things that the Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative gave us 
was the legislation. You know, it's in statute. It's the only 
cyber entity in statute that says we bring together the Federal 
cyber ecosystem. So not just CISA, but FBI and NSA and CYBERCOM 
and other agencies. That's why, you know, it was built to 
actually break down those silos, and we've been doing that over 
a short period of time, not just bringing in industry, but 
bringing in State and local colleagues, bringing in 
international partners, and then by design, bringing in the 
Federal Government. That is not an easy thing to do, sir.
    Mr. Luttrell. I wouldn't think so.
    Ms. Easterly. But we are trying really hard. I have to say, 
you know, I joined this--I joined this job from the private 
sector, and I thought there were a lot of issues with silos and 
a lack of cohesion. So we know what the problem is and we are 
working hard to enable us to fix it.
    Mr. Luttrell. That's great to hear. I'm sure just the sheer 
scalability is pretty arduous.
    But as far as operating across multiple cloud services, you 
know, with our threat-hunting teams, are we having success in 
that? Because everyone's different. I mean, the communication 
between the two are just completely--they are just Army-Navy to 
each other. That's an analogy. I'm sorry.
    Ms. Easterly. Be Navy.
    Mr. Luttrell. I was waiting on that one, right.
    To my point, if we do have a threat or an active attack in 
a certain corporation, a department, whatever, do we have 
success if it can move across multiple domains, with its 
ability to track that, but also notify and prevent?
    Ms. Easterly. Yes. I mean, it's another really, really 
important question. Let me hit first from the Federal civilian 
dot-gov, because we've been looking to make a lot of 
improvements there. So we are now--we have radically improved 
visibility that we really didn't have in Solar Winds. So 
because of the authorities that we have to put endpoint 
detection and response capabilities at departments and 
agencies, we can do that persistent hunting so we can have that 
visibility. We also now have something that gives us a 
dashboard level view to say what's going on at those systems. 
So that visibility is improving.
    On cloud providers in particular, you know, there's 
something called the shared responsibility model. I'm thinking, 
you know, as a military guy, you know, if no one's in charge, 
like, no one's in charge.
    Mr. Luttrell. Right.
    Ms. Easterly. If everyone's in charge, no one's in charge. 
So I have a little bit of concern with the shared 
responsibility model, particularly if it's putting the burden 
of responsibility on businesses that just don't have the 
resources to bear it. So I think at the end of the day, cloud 
providers need to bear the bulk of the security burden, and the 
visibility should come back to the entity that is contracted 
with those cloud service providers.
    So very important that things like logging, for example. 
Security logs help us understand the nature of a threat and 
malicious activity. But oftentimes if a cloud service provider 
is charging you extra for that security feature, then the 
customer will lack visibility. So there are things that we need 
to do to work with cloud providers to ensure that the shared 
responsibility model is not misplacing the burden on those who 
can't bear it.
    Mr. Luttrell. OK. I really would like to see that, not that 
it's not doing this, but translate down into my rural district 
in Polk County. You know, that's just something that hasn't 
come to fruition yet. So I'm hoping this system will continue 
to push the envelope and make sure that the--it's the American 
public, at the end of the day, that needs protecting, not our--
everyone.
    Ms. Easterly. One hundred percent. Yes.
    Mr. Luttrell. I thank you so much. I yield back, Mr. 
Chairman.
    Ms. Easterly. I'd love to come out to your district and----
    Mr. Luttrell. Come on.
    Ms. Easterly [continuing]. Have a discussion.
    Mr. Luttrell. You bet.
    Mr. Garbarino. The gentleman yields back.
    I now recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Swalwell, for 5 
minutes of questioning.
    Mr. Swalwell. Thank you, Chairman.
    Director, as you've laid out your mission and your 
accomplishments and your challenges, I see it that one of your 
greatest challenges is to figure out what are your core 
competencies and what you can do well to have the greatest 
impact and then what are the gaps that CISA can fill. Also, 
what are the most important functions that need to be carried 
out, even when doing so is controversial or risks picking a 
fight? So I was hoping you could speak to that.
    Ms. Easterly. Yes. Thank you for--thank you for asking the 
question.
    You know, when I came into this job, my predecessor is a 
great friend of mine, did a strategic intent document. That 
laid out some great priorities for what we do operationally, 
but, you know, frankly, we needed a road map. So we spent about 
a year actually developing that strategic plan. If you take a 
look at that, and I'm sure you've seen it, but it's organized 
not by our divisions or our mission-enabling offices. It's 
organized by four key principles: Cyber defense, infrastructure 
risk and resilience, operational collaboration, and agency 
unification. Because I'm a firm believer that if everything is 
a priority, nothing's a priority. So we basically laid out, 
these are the things that everybody in the agency needs to do, 
and we laid out representative outcomes, as well as a 
measurement approach.
    Now, based on that, every entity, every division, every 
mission-enabling office did an annual operating plan that lays 
out at a more granular level the measures of effectiveness and 
measures of performance that they are responsible for, and I 
track them on a quarterly basis. So we are really looking at 
being much more rigorous in how we allocate our resources and 
how we allocate our time to ensure that we are being good 
stewards of the taxpayer dollars.
    Mr. Swalwell. Thank you, Director. With respect to JCDC, I 
have a similar question. CISA needs to decide, you know, what 
are the core capabilities JCDC will focus on where it also can 
be most effective and put structure and processes in place to 
formalize those functions. So can you help me understand how 
you're thinking about some of those questions as it relates to 
JCDC's scope and mission moving forward?
    Ms. Easterly. Yes, absolutely. I think I just gave them a 
copy, you and the Chairman. I'm happy--would love to have a 
team come in and brief anybody who's interested, because I 
really think this is one of the most important groundbreaking 
things that the Congress has given us. So we have the strategy 
for the JCDC that we just finished up serendipitously in time 
for this hearing.
    So the focus is about two fundamental things. One is about 
planning and ensuring that we can plan against the most serious 
threats to the Nation. The second is collaborative fusion to 
help us understand the threat and then to drive down risk to 
the Nation.
    Now, given the myriad of threats that we face, there are a 
lot of demands that we have to enable us to be able to respond 
and be proactively prepared for various threats. So we've 
operationalized it against a significant vulnerability, Log4j, 
with the Shields Up campaign with the elections. But we are 
being very deliberate about what efforts we take on, and that 
is based on the threat and based on the feedback that we get 
from our partners.
    So if you look at the planning agenda, it's water, it's 
energy, it's open-source software to reduce risk to industrial 
control systems. So it's things that our partners asked us to 
focus on that we, based on the threat and the risk, we decide 
to focus on. But every one of those efforts has outcomes that 
are measurable, and then we get feedback from our partners.
    Mr. Swalwell. Earlier this week, DHS released its proposal 
to authorize the Cyber Safety Review Board, CSRB, a public-
private panel established by Executive Order in 2021 to 
investigate significant cyber incidents, as you alluded to 
earlier, similar to NTSB.
    What would the relationship be between the CSRB and CISA? 
How would it interact with CISA's new cyber incident reporting 
authorities, specifically, as you referenced in your opening 
statement, the subpoena authority? Do you see CSRB as 
sufficiently separate from CISA to preserve its voluntary 
partnerships with the private sector?
    Ms. Easterly. Yes, absolutely. I mean, the CSRB--so I 
appoint the members and we actually manage the infrastructure 
and the contract for that, but they have a distance from me, so 
I'm not part of that decision making, to keep some important, 
sort-of, cushion there.
    With respect to the admin subpoena, you know, the Congress 
very helpfully gave us admin subpoena separate, which allows us 
to actually do scanning of infrastructure, and then if we see a 
vulnerability, we can do a subpoena to find out who that victim 
is so we can tell them.
    You know, there is admin subpoena authority that comes with 
the CIRCIA as well.
    So I think it's probably a helpful thing, for the CSRB to 
have it. I don't think that there are any issues with their 
admin subpoena power as it relates to CISA's secret sauce, 
frankly, which is being seen as a trusted partner, not a 
regulator or not anybody who's going to issue punitive 
sanction.
    Mr. Swalwell. Great. Thank you.
    I yield back.
    Mr. Garbarino. The gentleman yields back.
    I now recognize my friend from Florida and the Chair of the 
Transportation and Maritime Security Subcommittee, Mr. Gimenez.
    Mr. Gimenez. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
    Thank you to the Ranking Member.
    Ms. Easterly, two separate subjects I want to talk about. 
One of them is, when I was mayor of Miami-Dade, I was 
approached and said that there may be some issues with the 
cranes at our port, where, I think, out of 13 cranes, 10 of 
them were made in China, and now--and then later found out 
maybe about 70--maybe 70--70 to 80 percent of the cranes in the 
United States are actually made in China.
    Now, some of those cranes have--all of those that are made 
in China have the skin, the bones, OK, are made in China, but 
in some the internal workings, the guts, some of the computer 
systems and the operating systems, may be made in Germany or 
some other place. But in some it's all Chinese-made. I was made 
aware that there may be some threats with this.
    I have two things I'm concerned about. No. 1, if the CCP 
decides not to replace with replacement parts or spare parts 
when they break down, it could hurt our ability to provide 
commerce, since most of the stuff that we move moves through 
these cranes; or, No. 2, if it's actually Chinese software 
reporting back to the CCP so they can track everything that we 
do--what cargo is flowing through, to where, et cetera, et 
cetera.
    Have you assessed that situation in the United States?
    Ms. Easterly. Yes, it is a real concern of ours. I think my 
head of cyber is going to appear before your committee on the 
10th of May.
    You know, I think you're referring to Zhenhua, the port 
machinery company--70, 80 percent, 23 seaports. We have 
significant concerns about supply chain disruption as well as 
surveillance. We are working with our partners across the 
Government to help with analysis and what we can do about it--
difficult, given the market-share piece of this. But I do think 
it is a significant problem that we need to turn our attention 
to.
    I also would just say, Congressman, that this is a piece of 
the larger issue of Chinese technology encroaching into our 
national security. I worry about that from a very strategic 
perspective.
    We're actually setting up a counter-PRC cyber effort that 
will be led by a very talented person that we're bringing on 
through cyber talent management system authorities.
    But these are things that we absolutely have to get ahead 
of.
    Mr. Gimenez. Fair enough. I don't want to give too much 
away, because, you know, it's his committee, not my committee. 
So I'll bring it to mind.
    The other thing I want to talk about is completely 
different, and it just came to me: That 80 percent of the 
drones that are used in the United States are actually 
manufactured in China too. It's come to my attention that, on 
occasion, with these drones, you hook it up to try to get a 
software update, OK? I was wondering if, when you're doing 
these software updates, you're also downloading information the 
other way.
    So can you imagine--can you imagine if the CCP, the PRC had 
all the information gathered, all the images gathered by 80 
percent of the drones flying around? That's an incredible 
amount of data.
    So is that download two-way, or is it one-way? Have we ever 
checked out to see if there's information going the other way? 
Or is something--I just thought of something nobody thought of?
    Ms. Easterly. Yes. No, when you think about the number of 
Chinese drones, it makes you worry less about the high-altitude 
balloon, in some ways, when you consider that. But, you know, 
all of these are significant threats that we need to take 
seriously.
    I don't know the specifics. What I would tell you from a 
technical perspective that I worry more about is not something 
being uploaded but if they're saying, download this software, 
provide this update, they could be putting something malicious 
in that update. That was sort-of what happened with SolarWinds 
and the Russians; there was something malicious in that 
software update.
    So I do think that there are significant concerns, again, 
given any sort of oversight or surveillance of a foreign 
adversary who's clearly the preeminent threat to this Nation.
    Mr. Gimenez. But do you know for sure they're not uploading 
information back to the host?
    Ms. Easterly. I do not know that. Happy to check it out----
    Mr. Gimenez. Yes.
    Ms. Easterly [continuing]. Or get you some information on 
it.
    But, you know, there's Chinese capabilities that are 
getting--TikTok, for example. There's a ton of data from the 
130 million Americans that use that that is very likely going 
back to the PRC.
    Mr. Gimenez. What's your agency doing about Trojan horses? 
When I say ``Trojan horse,'' it's some kind of malware that's 
stuck in a program that just sits dormant until they decide to 
unleash it.
    Ms. Easterly. Yes.
    Mr. Gimenez. That worries me too, that there may be it 
Trojan horses all over the place we know nothing about----
    Ms. Easterly. Yes.
    Mr. Gimenez [continuing]. And then, all of a sudden, you 
know, ``OK, unleash havoc on the United States.''
    Are we taking steps to try to avert that too?
    Ms. Easterly. Well, that sort-of goes to the entire heart 
of our mission, sir, really, I mean, because our job is to 
protect and defend critical infrastructure. It's our work with 
partners across the country to ensure that they're aware of 
those types of capabilities that can be used not just for 
espionage but also for destruction or disruptive purposes.
    So a lot of this comes down to education. But, also, it 
comes down to my earlier point. The technology that we rely on 
every day was not created with security and safety in mind. I 
think it's incredibly important that those technology products 
are tested and developed specifically before it comes to the 
consumer to look for potential vulnerabilities like that.
    Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, ma'am. My time is up.
    Ms. Easterly. Thank you, sir.
    Mr. Garbarino. The gentleman yields back.
    We've finished the first round of questions. I think there 
are couple who want to ask a second round.
    So don't worry, your doughnut is safe in the back. We still 
have it for you.
    So we're going to start the second round. I'm going to 
recognize the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr. Carter, for a 
second round of questions.
    Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Director Easterly, as we see technology move as fast as it 
does, we know that every day there's some new mode or method to 
infiltrate, to damage, to destroy.
    On a scale of 1 to 10, what would you say your agency feels 
about your ability and capability to remain competitive and 
equal to, hopefully a step ahead of, the bad guys?
    Ms. Easterly. It's hard to give you a 1 to 10. I would want 
to say we're----
    Mr. Carter. You can give me a 4 to 6, if you want.
    Ms. Easterly [continuing]. At a 7. But, you know, it's an 
anecdotal thing. Every day, we work to stay ahead of an 
adversary.
    I think, to be very frank with you, Congressman, I don't 
worry about capability. I think the United States of America 
has the most capable cyber forces in the world. I worry about 
the asymmetry of values. Because our adversaries--the Chinese, 
the Russians, the North Koreans, the Iranians, cyber 
criminals--will do things with impunity that we, frankly, 
wouldn't do, as a values-based democracy. That's where I think 
we have to be concerned.
    That's why this idea of the status quo being unacceptable--
we have to ensure that everybody in this Nation, from K through 
gray, is aware of what they need to do to stay safe on-line, 
that CEOs are taking responsibility, that software companies 
are building safe products, and that we are all working closely 
together for the good of the Nation.
    Mr. Carter. Along that line, the Biden administration's 
National Cybersecurity Strategy attempts to shift the emphasis 
away from consumers to the provider. This is a big idea that 
could substantially impact the price of software, its utility, 
cost, and competitiveness for the U.S. software industry and 
international markets.
    Understanding that much of our economic prosperity for the 
past several decades is based on innovation in computer 
software, what microeconomic model is DHS proposing to deal 
with this?
    When we shift the responsibility, there's a lot of risk 
that comes with that and a lot of challenge.
    Ms. Easterly. Yes. I can't speak to the microeconomic 
model. I'm happy to follow up on that. I think----
    Mr. Carter. OK. Now, that's No. 3 that you couldn't speak 
to today for me. Just keep--just keep a record.
    Ms. Easterly. You know, I'm a macroeconomic person. But, 
you know, happy to follow up.
    Mr. Carter. Fair enough.
    Ms. Easterly. But, look, at the end of the day, this is a 
big concept, shifting the burden.
    Just to kind-of talk about this at a strategic level, it's 
been 40 years since the internet came into being, right, with 
TCP/IP. You think back to 1983. Nobody thought about security 
when creating an internet. Nobody thought about safety security 
when creating software. Nobody thought about that when we were 
moving fast and breaking things with social media. Here we are 
in AI, and we're hurdling into a space that, frankly, we don't 
know what the outcomes will be.
    So I am a huge fan of innovation. It's one of our core 
values. But what I'm saying, Congressman, is, we cannot let 
innovation be the most important thing that we look at when 
we're thinking about creating products that Americans rely on 
every single day.
    I want to live in a world where I do not have to teach my 
90-year-old mom how to enable multifactor authentication on her 
phone. I want to live in a world where I don't have to check 
the box that I agree to the 17,000-word contract to turn my 
phone on that basically says, ``You're liable for everything 
bad that happens here.''
    Mr. Carter. Aren't we there? Aren't we there?
    Ms. Easterly. Aren't we there in terms of----
    Mr. Carter. All of the things that you just mentioned.
    Ms. Easterly. No, not at all. None of these things are 
baked in. That's the world that we need to live in, where 
security and safety is baked in, just as your seatbelt, your 
airbags are baked in and come with your car.
    Mr. Carter. I find that the more technology moves, the more 
sophisticated the basic functions are. You mentioned the 
telephone; you mentioned checking the box. That stuff does 
exist now, and it's getting more and more complicated for the 
average person to use any level of electronics.
    I understand the importance of technology moving. Are we 
moving in a direction that we're able to combat the threat of 
the--the infrastructure threat of ransomware, cyber attacks 
that cripple networks?
    Ms. Easterly. Yes, I think we are indeed getting more 
capable as a Nation. A lot of that is the growth in this agency 
that the Congress has generously helped us with.
    But, you know, at the end of the--I think we're sort-of 
saying the same thing here, Congressman. The complexity--we 
should not be putting the complexity on the consumer. The 
complexity needs to be put on the provider so everything is 
almost seamless and easy for the consumer. The consumer 
shouldn't have to figure out how to implement all those 
security controls. They need to come baked in.
    Mr. Carter. With that, are you concerned about what it does 
to the economics of it? I don't want to go deep into the 
macroeconomics of it, but the costs associated, what does that 
mean to the consumer?
    As we shift more responsibility to the provider, it's safe 
to assume that we're going to also see some pushback on what it 
costs----
    Ms. Easterly. Yes.
    Mr. Carter [continuing]. The individual.
    Ms. Easterly. I would much rather live in a world where I 
have much safer products. In a world that everything is 
digitized and connected and we are increasingly vulnerable as 
we leap into this space where everything is going to be smart 
and IoT, I would much rather pay it at the front end and know 
that I have a safe product, rather than knowing I'm going to 
get attacked with ransomware. Any of that----
    Mr. Carter. I could not agree with you more, except we have 
to----
    Mr. Garbarino. The gentleman's time has----
    Mr. Carter. May I just kind-of finish real fast?
    But we have to take into consideration that we have a lot 
of poor people. There are a lot of people who--that extra fee 
that we're talking about that's tacked on to the consumer makes 
a big difference to a person that's on a fixed income, that's 
unemployed or underemployed.
    So I would just ask that as we move forward that we're 
considerate of the fact that, while we want to make sure that 
the provider does this and there may be an extra cost 
associated, let's just be mindful that that extra cost, to many 
Americans, can be deal-breakers.
    Ms. Easterly. Hundred percent.
    Mr. Carter. Thank you.
    I yield back, sir.
    Mr. Garbarino. Thank you.
    I now recognize Mr. Ezell from Mississippi for 5 minutes.
    Mr. Ezell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Thank you, Director, again, for being here this afternoon. 
It's good to see you and hear all this stuff that is very 
complicated.
    I live in basically a pretty rural district. How is the 
CISA addressing some of the challenges with cybersecurity in 
the rural areas, especially with the cyber work force?
    You know, we've kind-of talked about that some, but, you 
know, out in the rural areas, you know, we need a little help.
    Ms. Easterly. Yes. One of the things I'm most excited 
about, sir, is the cybersecurity grants for State and local.
    Mr. Ezell. Yes.
    Ms. Easterly. I think this is a really groundbreaking 
program. You know, a billion dollars is not a lot, but I think 
if we can prove out the model, we can actually make a real 
difference to those entities that, frankly, are not well-
resourced at all.
    So I think, as you know, 80 percent of the money goes out 
to local, and 25 percent of that goes to rural. So it is very 
specifically focused on how to improve cybersecurity in places 
that typically don't have resources.
    So what we've seen to date is, we've seen requests for 
training to improve that cyber work force; we've seen requests 
for equipment; and requests for assessment. I think we've got 
15 plans in. We have approved all but, I want to say, two of 
them. Then seven, I think, have already--the money has already 
gone forward.
    I think Mississippi actually may be one of them. So I will 
check on that. But that money, I think, has already been 
disbursed.
    So we're working very hard to get that out the door.
    Mr. Ezell. Thank you very much.
    We plan on having a cybersecurity roundtable in August, and 
hopefully we could reach out and maybe you could come out and 
help us a little bit.
    Ms. Easterly. I would love that.
    Mr. Ezell. Very good. Would think you could get some good 
seafood down on the Gulf Coast.
    You know, we've talked a lot about some of the threats, 
but, in your view, what is the greatest cybersecurity threat 
that the Congress should be paying attention to right now?
    Ms. Easterly. Yes, I think there are two epoch-defining 
threats and challenges. One is China, and the other, I think, 
is artificial intelligence.
    There are some incredible things that AI will do, but we 
need to ensure that, just as we're talking about technology 
being built with security in mind, we need to ensure that these 
fantastic capabilities have the right controls and guardrails 
to keep us safe and secure.
    So I think those two challenges are things that we're going 
to be concerned about over the next 10, 20 years and more.
    Mr. Ezell. Thank you very much.
    Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
    Mr. Garbarino. The gentleman yields back.
    I now recognize my colleague from New Jersey, Mr. Menendez, 
for a second round.
    Mr. Menendez. Thank you, Chairman. I again just want to 
express my appreciation for you holding this hearing today.
    My colleague from Florida, we have ports in my district. I 
was the commissioner of the Port Authority of New York and New 
Jersey and seeing our cybersecurity spending go up and up each 
and every year because of the importance of our infrastructure 
and being very sensitive to how much of our technology is 
produced in China.
    The other reason I like being here is because: My 
grandmother lived to be 98. She only had a high school 
education, but into the last years of her life she loved 
learning about the new technology and watching it develop. You 
can imagine someone who was 98, the technology and the advances 
in technology.
    She said she loved learning about it and it didn't scare 
her at all, but what scared her is how quickly it was changing 
and that we weren't giving ourselves the opportunity to think 
about what it means for us. So your point about innovation just 
brought me back to those conversations, and they're important 
ones.
    But you also brought up so many good points, so thank you 
for your testimony. Thank you for what you're doing in your 
role as director.
    You know, but going back to the secure-by-design, secure-
by-default, I mean, there seems to be sort-of a challenge there 
because of, as my colleague was alluding to, how much of our 
technology is produced in China, which you've made several 
references to in your testimony. Secure-by-design, secure-by-
default, makes complete sense. But if we're not developing it, 
then how do we make sure and hold accountable, you know, 
foreign potential adversaries who are developing critical 
technology for us?
    You also said how much we rely on technology, which we are, 
right? So it's becoming a compounding problem, where we are 
almost losing the ability to live without this technology and 
yet we're not developing it ourselves.
    So how, in this sort-of manufacturing, R&D sort-of space 
and time that we live in, with the reliance on countries like 
China, can we get to a secure-by-design, secure-by-default 
future?
    Ms. Easterly. Yes. So we are actually very actively 
ensuring that, if there is Chinese technology or products 
within our supply chain, certainly for the Federal Government 
but also in terms of our ability to use a platform for 
informing critical infrastructure owners or operators about the 
dangers of Chinese technology, we would recommend that that be 
replaced or not used, frankly, which----
    Mr. Menendez. That's a challenging thing.
    Ms. Easterly [continuing]. Which is very--I agree with you, 
Congressman.
    Mr. Menendez. When you say supply chain and making sure you 
go through all the levels of the supply chain to make sure all 
the different component pieces are secure-by-design, secure-by-
default----
    Ms. Easterly. It is very challenging. You know, as my 
friend Kemba Walden likes to say, the word ``easy'' does not 
appear in the National Cybersecurity Strategy.
    But it's one of the reasons, to be frank, we are pushing so 
hard on the instantiation of software bill of materials. You 
know, we have to understand what is in our supply chain.
    Mr. Menendez. I understand.
    Ms. Easterly. Incredible complexity. But, you know, we 
can't say that, because I didn't know, I was able to--you know, 
our foreign adversaries did these implants and now our 
infrastructure has been compromised and disrupted or ultimately 
destroyed in the event of a conflict.
    So these are all very difficult things, but, you know, 
frankly, that's why this subcommittee and this partnership is 
so important to the security of the Nation.
    Mr. Menendez. Absolutely. And please--and I'm sure you know 
this, but please do consider us a partner, and these are things 
that we want to work on.
    But, you know, if there is a way or almost thinking about 
it sort-of as like a way to, as we sort-of onboard technology 
or bring it through, just--because I think the going through 
the supply chain--because you just see it on the sanctions 
front, right, and all the workarounds that there are, from, you 
know, different state actors, NDIs that appear on our sanctions 
list. That alone is really challenging to track, and then when 
you get to technology and being able to do that cross-border, I 
feel like that's going to be a challenge.
    But this was all really helpful. I went over on my last 
time, so I'm going to be mindful this time. My colleague from 
Texas just arrived, so I want to make sure she gets to her 
questions sooner. Thank you again so much, and I really look 
forward to continuing this conversation with you and your 
staff.
    I yield back.
    Mr. Garbarino. Thank you.
    The gentleman yields back.
    I now recognize Mr. Gimenez from Florida for his second 
round.
    Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    You know, as we talk about the big threat--and you said the 
two big threats are the CCP and AI. We also talked here about 
how we need to start to decouple. But if I were to tell you 
that I just heard of a major purchase of Chinese computers from 
one of our major departments, like, half a billion dollars' 
worth, all right, it kind-of makes you start--you know, are 
they listening to us? Or are they--who are they listening to, 
that they would go and buy half a billion dollars in computers, 
computers made in China or by a Chinese company? So I think we 
need to get that word out.
    I think there's--you know, since I serve on the Select 
Committee on China, you know, it's one of the areas that I find 
where we have bipartisan support and we kind-of think the same 
way. We may not have the same solutions or maybe an iteration 
of solutions, but we're on the same path, you know? It's good 
to see that America has finally woken up and, collectively, 
we're working to address this threat.
    I want to go to AI. You know, people are trying to make--
trying to say, ``Hey, we need to slow down AI.'' Frankly, we 
cannot slow down AI, because our adversaries are not going to 
slow down where they are, and they understand the potential of 
artificial intelligence and all sorts of things. But in 
military hardware, AI, if they get that advantage on us, it's 
huge. Huge. So we can't. We have to keep going.
    But, with that being said, AI has the potential to do 
incredible good. Unbelievable good. Mankind, womankind, you 
know, the human race can just explode, all right, with new 
findings, new knowledge, new abilities through the use of this 
technology.
    But, then, AI can also be incredibly destructive. So the 
only defense that we're going to have against AI is AI. So are 
we developing that capability too? You have--AI can do good, 
but then you also know that AI can do bad, so you have to have 
the defensive AI to fight the bad AI.
    Are we working on that too?
    Ms. Easterly. Yes, I mean, I am not an AI technical expert. 
I know that there is a lot of work being done both on the 
defensive side and on the offensive side.
    I agree with you, Congressman, that there are some amazing 
things that can be done with this capability. But I've also, 
probably much like you, seen a dark side when I was in the 
Army, when I was deployed many times, and when I was the head 
of counterterrorism at the White House.
    What I worry about are our adversaries, whether it's a 
nation-state like China or a terrorist or a criminal, using 
these to create malware, cyber weapons, to create bio-weapons, 
to do genetic engineering, to do things that, frankly, we may 
not do, as a values-based democracy.
    I think we need to have those really difficult and 
important conversations, because I really do believe in the 
power of good for technology, but AI will also be the most 
powerful weapons of this century. The most powerful weapons of 
the last century, nuclear weapons, were built and maintained by 
governments who were disincentivized to use them. This 
technology is built by companies, whose job it is to maximize 
profits for their shareholders. So it's a different 
conversation.
    I applaud the efforts to try and get ahead of it, both by 
the Congress as well as many across the Federal Government. I 
think it's incredibly important.
    Mr. Gimenez. Thank you very much.
    I yield back.
    Ms. Easterly. Thank you, sir.
    Mr. Garbarino. The gentleman yields back.
    I now recognize the gentlelady from Texas, Ms. Jackson Lee, 
for 5 minutes.
    Ms. Jackson Lee. Let me thank you for the courtesies 
extended and thank the Ranking Member for the courtesies 
extended. Appreciate being delayed for other meetings.
    But let me welcome you, Director Easterly. I'm hoping to 
get some real quick questions in.
    I invited you last year--it starts out with an invitation--
to the Energy Braintrust that I host, the Congressional Black 
Caucus Foundation. You were kind enough to send someone. But I 
am now inviting you for 2023. This Braintrust has been around 
now for more than 30 years, and we have enjoyed the 
participation of many in the administration.
    So someone is taking notes, and I appreciate it very much 
that you're doing so.
    I want to just continue in the line of questioning. I find 
the production domestically of chips--and I wanted to raise 
some quick questions.
    How important is the manufacturing of chips in the United 
States to cybersecurity, the security of our cyber system, 
doing our chips--having that manufacturing capacity right here 
in the United States?
    Ms. Easterly. I think it's hugely important for the United 
States to have that chip manufacturing capacity. From a 
technology perspective, I mean, certainly in terms of 
cybersecurity systems, chips are not a huge piece of the actual 
process----
    Ms. Jackson Lee. Right.
    Ms. Easterly [continuing]. But they're part of the 
technology, absolutely.
    Ms. Jackson Lee. We remember that during the pandemic, when 
phones, cars, and others were not able to be manufactured 
because of the supply chain.
    Let me quickly move to Houston. The list of critical 
infrastructure includes petrochemical companies. In fact, in 
years past, when we think about cyber or think about 
infrastructure, it was listing these fixed entities, and we 
heavily--which heavily rely on automation.
    Have petrochemical companies engaged with CISA in order to 
develop a good working relationship to deal with their critical 
infrastructure problems?
    I have another quick question, but go ahead.
    Ms. Easterly. Yes, ma'am, absolutely. We service the sector 
risk management agency for the chemical sector and have great 
relationships with those industries.
    Ms. Jackson Lee. One of the gaps in CISA, in terms of 
across the Nation, are NGO's, faith organizations, neighborhood 
organizations, small businesses, maybe even small colleges. So 
I'd be interested in working with the agency for a roundtable 
and laying the groundwork of informing that kind of level in 
the United States that are not necessarily informed.
    Is that a good idea, to make sure that we can have CISA in 
our communities talking to that level and to be able to raise 
up their understanding of the importance of cybersecurity?
    Ms. Easterly. Love it.
    Ms. Jackson Lee. We all have had the horrors of ransomware. 
We are facing it, the threats over the years, the stories, the 
tall tales, if you will. Russia continues to harbor large 
numbers of ransomware gangs.
    We know this threat will remain forward, but I've been 
impressed about what you've done. Do you want to expand a 
little bit on how you've gotten your hands around ransomware?
    I'm looking at my time, so let me put the second question 
in.
    AI is here. I was just talking to my seatmate here, and I 
was saying it was coming, and he made it very clear that we 
both agree it is here.
    I'm concerned about large populations--low-income, 
minorities, rural persons--out of the circle of even 
understanding AI and its good and its dangers. Maybe you could 
comment on that as it relates to cybersecurity and maybe the 
gaps of knowledge.
    So, first, Russia and the ransomware and then, second, the 
AI and its accessibility to those low-income communities.
    Thank you so much.
    Ms. Easterly. Thank you so much, Congresswoman.
    On ransomware, we have done so much since the summer of 
2022--2021, actually, following the Colonial Pipeline attack.
    Specifically, we stood up stopransomware.gov, which is a 
one-stop-shop website that brings together all of the Federal 
resources of the Government to explain what ransomware is, what 
to do if you get hit with ransomware, and, more importantly, 
how to build resilience to ransomware.
    We also stood up the Joint Ransomware Task Force recently, 
and we're very focused on target-rich, resource-poor, those 
communities that, frankly, like schools and hospitals and water 
facilities, local election offices, that don't have those 
resources. So we are very focused on providing things like 
ransomware assessments and best practices that they can use to 
deal with the scourge of ransomware.
    The other thing that we just launched is our Ransomware 
Vulnerability Warning Pilot, where entities, no matter what 
your size is, can sign up for vulnerability scanning and then 
get a prioritized list of where they might have 
vulnerabilities, where ransomware actors, like Russian-
sponsored ransomware actors, have specifically leveraged 
ransomware, so that allows them to patch those.
    Then, finally, our pre-ransomware initiative, where we are 
getting tips from industry, from researchers, from threat 
intel, that tell us that malware has been deployed but not yet 
activated. It's usually hours to days before malware is used to 
encrypt. Then we reach out in our field force--we've done it 
with K-12 schools, with local towns--to help them prevent, you 
know, a really bad day. That is the virtue of the model we've 
built with trust with industry.
    So those are some of the things that we're doing, and we're 
going to continue to drive that forward.
    On artificial intelligence, again, there are great 
capabilities. I think we need a really hard look at who these 
capabilities--who they're being used by, who they can be made 
available to, but also the guardrails for safety and security 
that are being put in place even as we innovate in this space.
    So I think it's a longer, much--you know, a hugely 
important conversation, so I appreciate the question, 
Congresswoman.
    Ms. Jackson Lee. I look forward engaging through this 
committee or otherwise. I think it's an important discussion 
for Members of Congress.
    Ms. Easterly. Thank you, ma'am.
    Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank you so very much.
    Thank you for the time.
    Mr. Garbarino. Absolutely.
    Ms. Jackson Lee. I yield back.
    Let's do it. Thank you.
    Mr. Garbarino. The gentlelady yields back.
    The end is almost near, Director. I think, though, the fact 
that everybody has been here today for a second round of 
questions--I mean, we've never had attendance like this, but 
that just shows how much everybody respects your opinion and 
how important of an issue this is.
    So I'm going to recognize myself for my second round of 
questions.
    I had a couple on secure by design and default, but I 
really enjoyed the questions before. I thought that was a great 
conversation. So I'm going to move ahead to--my staff actually 
prepared enough questions if we had eight rounds of questions, 
so I'll probably submit a couple and have you respond in 
writing.
    But I did want to get to on the--we talked a lot about the 
JCDC in our last hearing, and we talked a little bit about it 
today as well. I have spoken to a couple people that are on--or 
companies that are on the JCDC. We've heard that some of the 
companies are frustrated that information coming out of the 
JCDC is frequently already publicly available and isn't as 
timely as it could be.
    What information do organizations get through the JCDC that 
goes beyond what DHS already publishes through other channels 
that many JCDC members already participate in or already have 
access to?
    Let me--I just wanted to add, they all loved the idea--
nobody--they all loved the idea of the JCDC, but they did have 
this complaint about it.
    So, if you could answer, that'd be great.
    Ms. Easterly. Yes. You know, one of our operating 
principles at CISA is to treat feedback as a gift, and we are 
constantly talking to our partners so that we can improve. 
Because, at the end of the day, the model has to be, we're 
transparent, we're responsive, and we're adding value. If we're 
not adding value to the job of the cyber defender, we should go 
away. I know how hard that job is, and we're just trying to 
help them.
    You know, anecdotally, I think we've heard various flavors 
of, you know, ``these products are fantastic'' and ``these 
products are things that we've already seen.'' So I don't want 
to put too much into the fact that these are all--that you 
might hear one or two things. I would like to actually come 
back to you maybe with a more fulsome presentation based on 
recent feedback. We did two roundtables out at RSA.
    I mean, I will tell you, what's substantially different in 
the products and the advisories that we've put out over the 
past year is, first of all, they're all multisealed. That makes 
a difference, to have CISA and FBI and NSA and, by the way, our 
international partners on there as well. It's sending, finally, 
a coherent signal to industry that this is the voice of the 
U.S. Government collaboratively providing you feedback.
    Frankly, we have those enriched buyer industry partners who 
are giving us information that helps to make those products 
better.
    So, again, I'll go back and get you more specifics on that.
    But I think we've really evolved that into a better place, 
to be honest with you.
    Mr. Garbarino. Great. And, look, everybody that I've spoken 
to, they said, CISA, when they provide information, has been 
responsive, much more than other agencies that are involved. So 
that's great on your part, so we do appreciate that.
    We've also--so how does--there was also some comments about 
how membership decisions are made. I know we can--maybe we can 
work that into the presentation. But could you talk about how 
CISA balances the benefits of having a wider range of partners 
at the table with the risk that too large of a JCDC could 
reduce the efficiency----
    Ms. Easterly. Yes.
    Mr. Garbarino [continuing]. Of operational collaboration 
and decrease trust between the members?
    Ms. Easterly. Yes. Thanks for asking that question.
    You just said it: trust. Right? We have a lot of people--
Ranking Member Swalwell mentioned, a lot of people want to join 
the JCDC. We want to benefit from their expertise and their 
vulnerability and their capabilities, but we also want to make 
sure that we have trust groups.
    So we started out, when we set this thing up in August 
2021, we started out with the Big Tech companies. Why? Because 
they have the most global visibility. If you're an 
infrastructure provider, a cybersecurity vendor, a software 
vendor, they have global reach. We wanted to solve--help solve 
that visibility problem that was illuminated in SolarWinds, 
where we lacked visibility.
    So we started out with a small group, but since that period 
of time, we have been adding on hundreds of partners. We're at 
231. But the projects that we work on are basically 20 of these 
entities. So we are keeping the trust groups small. We're 
focused on efforts that address the biggest risks to the 
Nation. We are constantly doing after-action reviews to ensure 
that we can actually take great advantage of, you know, the 
talents, the authorities, the capabilities.
    But one other thing I'd say, Chairman, is, we talk a lot 
about industry, but the JCDC is actually industry, 
international partners, Federal partners, and State and local 
partners. So when you think about the tapestry of visibility 
that comes together based on the inputs of all of those 
partners, I would challenge some of the comments about the lack 
of value. I think, as we've evolved, I think we're getting into 
a place where that information is enriched and full of a lot 
more value than anything we've provided before from the Federal 
Government.
    Mr. Garbarino. Director, I appreciate that.
    Like I said, I have a couple more, but I'm going to let you 
off the hook. I'll send them and have you respond in writing. I 
appreciate it.
    I now yield to the Ranking Member, my colleague from 
California, Mr. Swalwell, for his second round.
    Mr. Swalwell. Great. Thank you, Chairman.
    Just following up on my colleague from the Miami area, he 
talked about, you know, the concern about Chinese drones and 
Chinese technologies in our infrastructure.
    I privately mentioned to him but I'll mention to my other 
colleagues that John Garamendi and I introduced legislation 
this week called the Airport Infrastructure Vehicle Security 
Act, which would prohibit Federal funds from being spent on 
Chinese buses.
    They are flooding our communities with cheap passenger 
buses. It's not just that, you know, this hurts the ability to 
``make it in America,'' but, you know, they're wiring these 
buses up with WiFi and other abilities to connect to the 
network.
    So we'll send that around to everyone.
    On AI, to kind-of take this to the worst-case scenario, I 
understand that a zero-click attack is where I could receive a 
text message or an email, and even with the best cyber hygiene, 
because it was sent to me, that's it, they're in.
    I also understand that, right now, to conduct those zero-
click attacks, they're very resource-intensive, they're very 
expensive. So adversaries have to really want to get into 
someone's system or device.
    Does AI put us at risk of significantly reducing the cost 
for the adversary to carry out a zero-click attack?
    Ms. Easterly. I mean, I don't have a technical study on 
that, but I would assume so. I think, as much as AI can be used 
for amazing things, I think it can be used by our adversary to 
cause great damage.
    You know the saying, Ranking Member, is, you know, you only 
have to be right once, as an adversary; as a defender, you've 
got to be right all the time. Think about that in terms of the 
offense-defense overmatch of an adversary.
    Mr. Swalwell. Yes.
    Ms. Easterly. So it makes our job even more difficult.
    Now, the optimist--and I used to be a big tech optimist, 
and now I'm a tech realist--will say, ``Well, we can also 
create these incredible defensive AI capabilities.'' And that's 
probably true.
    Mr. Swalwell. Sure.
    Ms. Easterly. But the thing that I worry about is, we are 
hurdling into this space driven by competition in business, not 
necessarily driven by safety or security concerns.
    While I am--to Congressman Menendez's point earlier, I am 
concerned about China, but look at the difference. China is 
focused on implementing AI with a huge amount of regulation, 
right? So that's the difference. They are actually being very 
purposeful about how they're controlling and evolving that 
capability. We are not.
    So I think we need to just think about what AI looks like 
in China and what AI looks like here and how it could be used 
for nefarious purposes.
    Mr. Swalwell. Shifting to insurance, you know, there's not 
a lot of insurers in the cyber market. One insurer told me that 
the most successful insurer is not the person who has the most 
policies, because you would not be able to cover the risk if 
there was a significant, wide-spread attack.
    I know in the cybersecurity strategy that you put out, you 
do conceive or at least contemplate, you know, a TRIA-like 
system. I just wanted to know if you could just speak more to 
cyber insurance.
    Particularly, I'm thinking of, you know, the giants. 
They're going to figure it out, and they're going to have, 
sort-of, the best left-of-boom defenses. I really do worry, 
though, about the SMEs, you know, the small and medium-size 
businesses, who you have described as target-rich, cyber-poor.
    So could you just wrap up here, with my final minute, and 
just to speak to cyber insurance?
    Ms. Easterly. Yes, absolutely. You know, we are doing this 
study based on the National Cybersecurity Strategy.
    I think it's--the difficulty kind-of goes back to the fact 
that we do not have a comprehensive view of the landscape 
because, heretofore, we don't have that legislation--or, we 
don't have that implementation on CIRCIA. I think that hinders 
cyber insurance companies from being able to price insurance 
policies, if you don't understand what your baseline is for 
cyber incidents and attacks.
    That's also, you know, some of the discussion on--I think 
Lloyd's made the decision that they exclude state actors----
    Mr. Swalwell. War exceptions.
    Ms. Easterly [continuing]. Policies from state actors, the 
war exception, which would make it difficult if you connect, 
like, NotPetya and state-sponsored criminals.
    So it's a space that I think will benefit from a better 
understanding of the ecosystem and, I think, a robust sort of 
TRIA-like study. I welcome that work to come. But it's also 
something I'd love to dig more deeply into----
    Mr. Swalwell. Great.
    Ms. Easterly [continuing]. Especially because you've got 
Cowbell in your district----
    Mr. Swalwell. Yes.
    Ms. Easterly [continuing]. And we have talked to them 
before.
    Mr. Swalwell. Great. Thank you.
    I yield back.
    Mr. Garbarino. Thank you.
    The gentleman yields back.
    I almost made a ``cowbell'' question--or, joke, but I 
didn't.
    I love the idea on cyber insurance. I think, even though we 
don't have direct oversight here, I do see it also on the 
Financial Services Committee, the Insurance Subcommittee. So, 
if we could somehow work out a hearing on that, I think it'd be 
great.
    But I want to thank Director Easterly for the valuable 
testimony and the Members for their great questions today.
    The Members of the subcommittee may have some additional 
questions--I know I do--for you. We would ask the witness to 
please respond to these in writing.
    Pursuant to committee rule VII(D), the hearing record will 
be held open for 10 days.
    Without objection, the subcommittee stands adjourned.
    Ms. Easterly. Thank you, sir.
    [Whereupon, at 3:47 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]



                            A P P E N D I X

                              ----------                              

      Questions for Jen Easterly From Chairman Andrew R. Garbarino
    Question 1. In our last hearing, I asked Ms. Tina Won Sherman from 
GAO whether CISA's ability to support the Sector Risk Management 
Agencies (SRMA) had grown commensurate with its budget. She answered 
that we really can't tell.
    What metrics do you all use to measure and evaluate CISA's support 
to the SRMAs?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 2a. The administration is re-writing Presidential Policy 
Directive-21, which sets Executive branch policy when it comes to 
Sector Risk Management Agencies.
    Where do you think CISA's role starts and stops when it comes to 
supporting the SRMAs?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 2b. What are you doing in the mean time to support the 
SRMAs as you prepare to re-write the National Infrastructure Protection 
Plan and they prepare to re-write their sector-specific plans?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 3a. CISA's foundational mission is to administer Federal 
civilian Executive branch (FCEB) cybersecurity requirements, a daunting 
but hugely important task. It's my sense that your agency struggles in 
part with how other departments and agencies in the Government perceive 
it.
    How do you view CISA's role in the FCEB? Do you think CISA should 
be a Service provider? Operational partner? Advisor? Something else?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 3b. What can Congress do to support and develop CISA's 
position in the interagency?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 4a. We have been talking about revamping one of CISA's 
flagship Federal cybersecurity programs, the National Cybersecurity 
Protection System, which includes EINSTEIN, for a long time. It's an 
outdated program that has faced problems, including struggles to fully 
implement the requirements.
    How does CISA plan to overcome the issues that have plagued 
previous iterations of NCPS?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 4b. As you build this new program, how do you envision it 
fitting into a very dynamic environment as agencies implement 
requirements from the May 2021 Cyber Executive Order, including the 
Zero Trust Strategy, and other specific capability requirements? How 
are you ensuring it isn't duplicating those efforts?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 5. Director Easterly, as you know, Executive Order 14028 
from May 2021 required all Federal agencies to adopt endpoint detection 
and response or EDR technologies, with CISA charged with that 
deployment.
    Can you provide us with an update on the status of deployment 
across the FCEB? How many agencies has it been deployed on? Who has not 
deployed it yet?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 6. The committee is aware that CISA is currently paying 
for the first 2 years of certain Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation 
(CDM) shared services for agencies, after which the agencies must pay.
    Is that accurate? Please explain how this process is working and if 
there are any agencies who are not planning to pay for those services 
in year 3.
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 7. We have heard that CISA has narrowly defined what it 
considers as an endpoint to only workstations or desktops and has left 
out others like mobile devices and cloud environments.
    Is CISA going to add mobile and cloud to the program? If not, why 
not?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 8. Director Easterly, has CISA considered operating EDR as 
a shared service? If not, why?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 9. As you know, DHS has provided CDM services to agencies 
for several years now. So far, CDM's attention has been primarily on 
larger agencies.
    What is your perspective on how the CDM program might evolve to 
provide the same level of attention to smaller and independent 
agencies?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 10. According to BlackBerry's just-released quarterly 
Global Threat Intelligence Report, governments face an ever-growing 
number of cyber threats that are increasing in sophistication. Earlier 
this month, you observed that terrorists, cyber criminals, and 
adversary nation-states could make use of advancements in artificial 
intelligence (AI) technologies to weaponize cybersecurity.
    In the face of this threat, are Federal civilian Executive branch 
agencies adequately leveraging advanced AI-enabled cybersecurity tools 
to enhance the defense of Federal networks, especially against AI-
capable adversaries? If not, why not?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 11. According to BlackBerry's just-released quarterly 
Global Threat Intelligence Report, the Russia-linked malware PIPEDREAM 
recently attempted to compromise industrial control systems in U.S. 
energy and gas infrastructure.
    How concerned are you about the recurrence of such threats within 
the energy sector, and across other critical infrastructure sectors--
and what can industry do to better prepare itself for such incidents?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 12. It is vital to increase cybersecurity across all 
sectors in the United States, but how are you currently supporting more 
mature sectors, such as the financial services industry?
    How will CISA support cross-sector risk identification and 
mitigation planning for more cyber-mature sectors?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 13. Based on a report issued by Expert Insights in March 
of this year, 71 percent of ransomware attacks are targeted at small 
businesses, companies that are in your own words, ``Target-Rich and 
Resource-Poor.''
    Besides issuing guidelines, what else can CISA be doing to help 
small businesses respond to these attacks?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 14. Watching the various cyber activities leading up to 
and during Russia's war on Ukraine, what do you see as cyber-based 
indicators that countries like China may exhibit before an invasion of 
a sovereign country like Taiwan?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 15. The FBI, DHS, and CISA as well as other Government 
agencies are charged with protecting the American public from cyber 
attacks and tracking down cyber perpetrators. But to do that, data is 
key.
    Where do you see reconciliation between their duties to identify, 
defend, and prosecute cyber criminals and the data/tools needed to do 
so, and privacy of citizens?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 16a. CISA has been working on a set of cybersecurity 
performance goals (CPG). There is concern in the private sector that 
these voluntary performance goals will wind up being treated like the 
presumably voluntary NIST CSF--as a de facto template for mandatory 
requirements.
    Can you tell us how these CPGs fit into this construction that 
liability should be on the provider?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 16b. Can you describe how CISA engaged the private sector, 
including the operational technology community, and other stakeholders 
to gain feedback and make changes?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 16c. If an entity wants CISA to consider changes to the 
CPGs, what systems exist to provide input to CISA?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 16d. With what periodicity does CISA plan to update the 
CPGs?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 16e. How will CISA measure and evaluate the effectiveness 
and impact of the CPGs on reducing cyber risk and enhancing resilience, 
and how will those measurements guide future CPG updates?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 17. CISA is leading in the Federal space in providing 
support to educators on school security and safety. Given the differing 
needs of schools throughout the Nation, how does CISA's school safety 
teamwork with regional or local institutions like the New York State 
Center for School Safety to ``train the trainer'' and disseminate 
Federal resources?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 18. In the Cybersecurity Best Practices for Smart Cities 
document released by the ``Five Eye Nations'' on April 19, 2023, the 
guidance suggests that ``Organizations should use only trusted 
information and communications technology (ICT) vendors and 
components.''
    How does a business become a trusted ICT vendor and what is CISA 
doing to expand partnership opportunities with businesses and 
organizations?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 19. Last November, you announced that CISA plans to expand 
the Cybersecurity Education and Training Assistance Program (CETAP) 
Nation-wide after a successful program in the State of Louisiana 
training educators for K-12 cybersecurity education. Congress believes 
strongly in this program--having codified it into law and appropriating 
resources despite successive budget requests that have zeroed out the 
funds.
    What is CISA's plan to scale CETAP to get more teachers trained so 
these teachers can help train the next generation of the cyber 
workforce and the entire citizenry to be more cyber aware?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 20a. In February 2020, Executive Order No. 13905 was 
issued by the Executive Office of the President. This Executive Order 
required that the Secretary of Homeland Security support resilient 
positioning, navigation, and timing (PNT) solutions by working with 
sector-specific agencies to develop contractual language for Federal 
contracts for products, systems, and services that support or utilize 
PNT services.
    Critical infrastructure resilience is a top priority for this 
committee as it works to help support DHS and CISA's goals for 
improving our Nation's cyber posture. Can you provide an update on the 
state of PNT implementation?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 20b. We understand that PNT profiles were established in 
accordance with the Executive Order. What is the next step for DHS in 
relation to EO13905 implementation, and are there significant barriers 
to completing the requirements of EO13905?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 20c. The EO requires the development of ``contractual 
language for inclusion of the relevant information from the PNT 
profiles in the requirements for Federal contracts for products, 
systems, and services that integrate or utilize PNT services, with the 
goal of encouraging the private sector to use additional PNT services 
and develop new robust and secure PNT services.'' In the development of 
such contractual language, how will CISA tailor sector specific 
requirements to encourage private-sector use in a manner that does not 
encourage any single solution?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 20d. We also understand that the National Risk Management 
Center (NRMC) is taking the lead on this effort. Does the CISA budget 
request provide the agency with enough discretionary support to fulfill 
the requirements of EO13905? If not, what further resources or 
information would be required by NRMC to make progress on working with 
sector-specific agencies to develop contractual language?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
      Questions for Jen Easterly From Ranking Member Eric Swalwell
    Question 1a. CISA recently announced a plan to establish a 
Systemically Important Entities Office, with the goal of identifying 
``target rich, cyber poor'' entities, targeting K-12 schools, 
hospitals, and water and wastewater sectors. CISA also plans to 
establish an ``enhanced engagement'' program with these sectors. This 
is an extension of an effort DHS has been trying to accomplish for 
nearly two decades, through efforts like the Section 9 list and the 
National Asset Database--but has been unsuccessful.
    Please describe the remit of the Systemically Important Entities 
(SIE) Office and where it will fit into CISA's organizational 
structure.
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 1b. How will this SIE effort, and the program office, 
differ from previous efforts to identify the critical of the critical, 
such as the Section 9 list and the National Asset Database?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 1c. More specifically, what is the relationship between 
SIEs and entities on the Section 9 list? What do you see as the 
difference in the scope of these two designations?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
       Questions for Jen Easterly From Honorable Robert Menendez
    Question 1a. CISA has previously touted efforts with private 
entities like CYBER.org, the Girl Scouts of America, and Girls Who Code 
as examples of partnerships that can help amplify educational 
opportunities and grow the pipeline of cybersecurity workers.
    Has CISA experienced any successes or challenges in public-private 
partnerships for cybersecurity workforce development? Please describe 
the successes and challenges and detail how the agency overcame any 
challenges.
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 1b. Please provide a list of private-sector entities, 
including academic and non-profit organizations, with which CISA 
partners to strengthen the cybersecurity workforce. Please describe the 
nature of the partnership, the activities jointly engaged in, and the 
demographic groups each of these partnerships seeks to reach.
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 1c. If the agency requires additional resources such as 
funding or authorities to better engage non-governmental entities for 
cybersecurity workforce development, please describe what those may be.
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 2a. As you know, CISA issued $2 million in grants to 
NPower and the CyberWarrior Foundation as part of a 3-year pilot 
program announced in October 2021.
    Please provide an update on these activities. How have NPower and 
CyberWarrior started executing their grants? What plans do they have to 
continue spending their award over the 3-year period? How will CISA 
track and monitor their performance?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 2b. How will CISA measure success for these grant awards, 
and what criteria will be used to determine success or failure? Does 
CISA have a process in place to incorporate any lessons learned into 
future grant-making activities?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.

                                 

