
 - CONSUMER PERSPECTIVES: POLICY PRINCIPLES FOR A FEDERAL DATA PRIVACY FRAMEWORK

[Senate Hearing 116-593]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]


                                                       S. Hrg. 116-593

                  CONSUMER PERSPECTIVES: POLICY PRINCIPLES 
                   FOR A FEDERAL DATA PRIVACY FRAMEWORK

=======================================================================

                                HEARING

                               BEFORE THE

                         COMMITTEE ON COMMERCE,
                      SCIENCE, AND TRANSPORTATION
                          UNITED STATES SENATE

                     ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

                             FIRST SESSION

                               __________

                              MAY 1, 2019

                               __________

    Printed for the use of the Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
                             Transportation
                             
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]                             


                Available online: http://www.govinfo.gov
                
                               __________
 
                                
                    U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE                    
52-692 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2023                    
          
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------     
               
       SENATE COMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, SCIENCE, AND TRANSPORTATION

                     ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

                             FIRST SESSION

                  ROGER WICKER, Mississippi, Chairman
JOHN THUNE, South Dakota             MARIA CANTWELL, Washington, 
ROY BLUNT, Missouri                      Ranking
TED CRUZ, Texas                      AMY KLOBUCHAR, Minnesota
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska                RICHARD BLUMENTHAL, Connecticut
JERRY MORAN, Kansas                  BRIAN SCHATZ, Hawaii
DAN SULLIVAN, Alaska                 EDWARD MARKEY, Massachusetts
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               TOM UDALL, New Mexico
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          GARY PETERS, Michigan
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
MIKE LEE, Utah                       TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
RON JOHNSON, Wisconsin               JON TESTER, Montana
TODD YOUNG, Indiana                  KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
RICK SCOTT, Florida                  JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
                       John Keast, Staff Director
                  Crystal Tully, Deputy Staff Director
                      Steven Wall, General Counsel
                 Kim Lipsky, Democratic Staff Director
              Chris Day, Democratic Deputy Staff Director
                      Renae Black, Senior Counsel
                           
                           
                           C O N T E N T S

                              ----------                              
                                                                   Page
Hearing held on May 1, 2019......................................     1
Statement of Senator Wicker......................................     1
Statement of Senator Cantwell....................................     3
Statement of Senator Blunt.......................................    59
Statement of Senator Schatz......................................    61
Statement of Senator Fischer.....................................    63
Statement of Senator Tester......................................    65
Statement of Senator Blackburn...................................    67
Statement of Senator Peters......................................    68
Statement of Senator Thune.......................................    70
Statement of Senator Markey......................................    72
Statement of Senator Moran.......................................    75
Statement of Senator Rosen.......................................    76
Statement of Senator Blumenthal..................................    78
Statement of Senator Sinema......................................    80
Statement of Senator Sullivan....................................    81
Statement of Senator Cruz........................................    83

                               Witnesses

Helen Dixon, Commissioner, Data Protection Commission of Ireland.     5
    Prepared statement...........................................     7
Jules Polonetsky, Chief Executive Officer, Future of Privacy 
  Forum..........................................................    12
    Prepared statement...........................................    13
James P. Steyer, Chief Executive Officer and Founder, Common 
  Sense Media....................................................    26
    Prepared statement...........................................    28
Neema Singh Guliani, Senior Legislative Counsel, Washington 
  Legislative Office, American Civil Liberties Union.............    31
    Prepared statement...........................................    33

                                Appendix

Response to written questions submitted by Hon. Jerry Moran to:
    Helen Dixon..................................................    87
    Jules Polonetsky.............................................    88
    Neema Singh Guliani..........................................    90

 
                         CONSUMER PERSPECTIVES:
                    POLICY PRINCIPLES FOR A FEDERAL
                         DATA PRIVACY FRAMEWORK

                              ----------                              


                         WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 2019

                                       U.S. Senate,
        Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation,
                                                    Washington, DC.
    The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m. in room 
SD-G50, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Roger Wicker, 
Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
    Present: Senators Wicker [presiding], Thune, Blunt, Cruz, 
Fischer, Moran, Sullivan, Gardner, Blackburn, Capito, Scott, 
Cantwell, Blumenthal, Schatz, Markey, Peters, Tester, Sinema, 
and Rosen.

            OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ROGER WICKER, 
                 U.S. SENATOR FROM MISSISSIPPI

    The Chairman. Good morning.
    Today, the Committee gathers for another hearing on 
consumer data privacy.
    I am glad to convene this hearing with my colleague, 
Ranking Member Cantwell, and I welcome our witnesses and thank 
them for appearing today: Ms. Helen Dixon, Ireland's Data 
Protection Commissioner; Mr. Jules Polonetsky, CEO of the 
Future of Privacy Forum; Mr. Jim Steyer, CEO and founder of 
Common Sense Media; and Ms. Neema Singh Guliani, Senior 
Legislative Counsel for the American Civil Liberties Union. 
Welcome to all of you.
    Consumers are the bedrock of our economy. Through the 
consumption of goods and services, consumers drive economic 
activity, power job creation, and create opportunities for 
innovation and economic advancement in the United States and 
around the world.
    To foster relationships with consumers, businesses have 
historically collected and used information about their 
patrons. The collection of data about consumers' likes, 
dislikes, and commercial interests has ultimately served to 
benefit consumers in the form of more customized products and 
services and more choices at reduced costs.
    Consumer data has tremendous societal benefits as well. In 
a world of ``big data'' where physical objects and processes 
are digitized, there is an increased volume of consumer data 
flowing throughout the economy. This data is advancing entire 
economic sectors such as health care, transportation, and 
manufacturing. Data enables these sectors to improve their 
operations, target resources and services to underserved 
populations and increase their competitiveness.
    The consumer benefits of a data-driven economy are 
undeniable. These benefits are what fuel the vibrancy and 
dynamism of today's Internet marketplace. Despite these 
benefits, however, near daily reports of data breaches and data 
misuse underscore how privacy risks within the data-driven 
economy can no longer be ignored.
    The increased prevalence of privacy violations threatens to 
undermine consumers' trust in the Internet marketplace. This 
could reduce consumer engagement and jeopardize the long-term 
sustainability and prosperity of the digital economy.
    Consumer trust is essential. To maintain trust, a strong, 
uniform Federal data privacy framework should adequately 
protect consumer data from misuse and other unwanted data 
collection and processing. When engaging in commerce, consumers 
should rightly expect that their data will be protected.
    So today, I hope our witnesses will address how a Federal 
privacy law should provide consumers with more transparency, 
choice, and control over their information to prevent harmful 
data practices that reduce consumer confidence and stifle 
economic engagement.
    To provide consumers with more choice and control over 
their information, both the European Union's General Data 
Protection Regulation and the California Consumer Privacy Act 
provide consumers with certain privacy rights. Some of these 
rights include the right to be informed or the right to know; 
the right of access; the right to erasure or deletion; the 
right to data portability; and the right to nondiscrimination, 
among others.
    I hope our witnesses will address how to provide these 
types of rights within a United States Federal framework 
without unintentionally requiring companies to collect and 
retain more consumer data. Provisioning certain privacy rights 
to individuals without minimum controls may have the opposite 
effect of increasing privacy risks for consumers.
    In developing a Federal privacy law, the existing notice 
and choice paradigm also has come under scrutiny. Under notice 
and choice, businesses provide consumers with notice typically 
through a lengthy and wordy privacy policy about their data 
collection and processing practices. Consumers are then 
expected to make a ``take it or leave it'' choice about whether 
or not to purchase or use a product or service. But is this 
really a choice?
    I hope our witnesses will address how to ensure that 
consumers have access to simplified notices that offer 
meaningful choices about what information an organization 
collects about them instead of a lengthy and confusing privacy 
notice or terms of use that are often written in legalese and 
bury an organization's data collection activities.
    I also hope witnesses will speak to ways in which Congress 
can provide additional tools and resources for consumers to 
make informed privacy decisions about the products and services 
they choose to use both online and offline.
    Fundamental to providing truly meaningful privacy 
protections for consumers is a strong, consistent Federal law. 
This is critical to reducing consumer confusion about their 
privacy rights and ensuring that consumers can maintain the 
same privacy expectations across the country.
    I look forward to a thoughtful discussion on these issues. 
And again, welcome to all of our witnesses.
    I now recognize my good friend and Ranking Member, Senator 
Cantwell.

               STATEMENT OF HON. MARIA CANTWELL, 
                  U.S. SENATOR FROM WASHINGTON

    Senator Cantwell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    And thank you to the witnesses for being here today on this 
important hearing about how to develop a Federal data privacy 
framework. It is essential that we give a front row seat to the 
consumer advocate perspective, and that is what today's 
conversation does.
    When the dust settles after a data breach or a misuse of 
data, consumers are the ones who are left harmed and 
disillusioned. In the two months since our last Full Committee 
hearing on privacy, consumer data has continued to be 
mishandled. It is clear that companies have not adequately 
learned from past failures, and at the expense of consumers, we 
are seeing that self-regulation is insufficient.
    Just days ago, cybersecurity researchers revealed the 
existence of a massive cloud data breach left wide open and 
unprotected, containing addresses, full names, dates of birth, 
income, marital status on more than 80 million U.S. households. 
This blatant disregard for security and privacy risks makes it 
clear why we are here today.
    Microsoft recently admitted that an undisclosed number of 
consumer Web e-mail accounts were compromised. We learned more 
about privacy lapses on Facebook and two more third party 
Facebook apps exposed data on Facebook users revealing over 540 
million records including comments, likes, account names, and 
Facebook IDs.
    So, Mr. Chairman, how do we create a culture of data 
security that protects consumers and allows commerce to 
continue to grow?
    Consumers continue to be bombarded by threats to their 
privacy. Cybersecurity adversaries become more sophisticated 
and more organized day by day, and we really need to understand 
privacy on a continuum of data security. We need to make a more 
proactive approach to cybersecurity and make sure that we are 
continuing to protect consumers.
    This becomes especially important in the age of Internet of 
Things. Yesterday, the Security Subcommittee considered this 
issue at length. Billions of devices collecting data about 
consumers at all times means there are billions of entry points 
and large surface areas for cyber attack. We learned more about 
new botnet attacks and now weaknesses almost daily.
    And we face serious questions of how supply chain 
vulnerability, which is reminding us about how security here in 
the U.S. is dependent upon the health of our Internet 
cybersecurity. Members on our side of the aisle even had a 
secure briefing on the potential threats and impacts to our own 
devices.
    So it is important to remember that the Internet is a 
global network. No matter how secure we make our networks, we 
remain vulnerable to weaknesses abroad. This is why it is 
essential that we have a national strategy to deal with these 
threats.
    We also need to work with our international partners to 
form coalitions around cybersecurity standards and work toward 
harmonizing privacy and cybersecurity regulations.
    These latest privacy and security breaches and advancing 
cyber threats show that this problem is accelerating, but as 
you said, Mr. Chairman, there is also lots of opportunity for 
great applications, services, and devices that we all like. So 
it illustrates the complexity of the challenges we face.
    Consumers are at the center of this and we cannot just 
require them to have a deeper understanding of the risks 
involved. We need to make sure that their devices and concerns 
are not just about notice and consent, but we have strong 
provisions here and a description that will help create a 
better culture. The best plain language notices, the clearest 
opt-in consent provisions, the most crystal clear transparency 
does not do any good when companies are being careless or 
willingly letting our data out the back door to third parties 
that have no relationship to the consumers. While the benefits 
of the online world are everywhere--and I truly mean that--
everywhere--so must be the protection of personal information 
that is more than just a commodity. We need to make sure that 
the culture of monetizing our personal data at every twist and 
turn is countered with the protection of people's personal 
data.
    So Congress has to come to terms with this. I know that the 
members of this committee are working very diligently on trying 
to address that and that we are working to try to make sure 
that the things that happened in the 2016 election cycle also 
do not happen in the 2020 cycle. But these issues of 
information being stolen or manipulated or trying to influence 
or disrupt governments, even our own hacking of our employee 
personal information account, show that we are vulnerable and 
that we need to do more.
    So the consistency of the hearings that we have had on this 
issue--I appreciate both Chairman Thune and you having these 
hearings about cybersecurity, about Equifax, about cyber 
hygiene, and what we should be doing--these all I believe 
should be part of the solution. Data security for Americans 
means that we extend the protections and we make sure that the 
online world is operating in a way that we see are helping to 
protect consumers and individual information.
    So, Mr. Chairman, I know that you remain very dedicated to 
comprehensive legislation here. I do as well, even though the 
challenge is high. We need to have the opportunity to craft 
solutions that address security and privacy for the entire life 
cycle of our data and collection to storage and to processing. 
So hopefully today's hearing will give us more input as to the 
way consumers look at this issue and what we can do to help us 
move forward. Thank you.
    The Chairman. Thank you very much, Senator Cantwell.
    And again, we welcome our witnesses. Your entire statements 
will be included in the record, and we ask each of you to 
summarize your opening statements within five minutes. We will 
begin down at this end of the table with Ms. Dixon. Welcome.

    STATEMENT OF HELEN DIXON, COMMISSIONER, DATA PROTECTION 
                     COMMISSION OF IRELAND

    Ms. Dixon. Chairman Wicker, Ranking Member Cantwell, and 
members of the Committee, thank you for inviting me to be here 
today.
    I am pleased to have the opportunity to share with the 
Committee the experience of the Irish Data Protection 
Commission in dealing with complaints from consumers under EU 
data protection law and hope it will be of assistance in your 
deliberations on a Federal privacy law.
    As the Committee is aware, I submitted in advance a 
slightly more expansive written statement to you than my five 
minutes today will permit. So as suggested by the Chair, I will 
cover all of its key points for you briefly now.
    An important context in talking about EU data protection 
law is the fact that the right to have one's personal data 
protected exists as an explicit fundamental right of EU persons 
under the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights. It is the case then 
that the right to data protection in the EU exists in all 
personal data processing contexts and not just in commercial 
contexts.
    The Committee is well aware I think at this stage of the 
basic structure of the EU GDPR which sets out, firstly, 
obligations on organizations, then rights for individuals, and 
finally, provides for supervision and enforcement provisions to 
be implemented by independent data protection authorities. As 
an EU regulation, it has direct effect in every EU member 
state.
    The obligations on organizations processing information 
that relates to an identified or identifiable person are set 
down in a series of high-level technology-neutral principles, 
so principles of lawfulness, fairness, transparency, purpose 
limitation, data minimization, accuracy, storage limitation, 
integrity, and confidentiality and accountability.
    The GDPR contains some prescription around new 
accountability provisions and, in particular, requirements in 
certain cases to now appoint a data protection officer. In 
addition there is an obligation to notify breaches of personal 
data that give rise to risks for individuals to the data 
protection authority within 72 hours of the organization 
becoming aware of the breach.
    In turn then, the individuals and consumers whose personal 
data are processed have a series of enumerated rights under the 
GDPR. These cover the right to transparent information, the 
right to access to a copy of their personal data, the right to 
rectification, the right to erasure, and so on. And each of 
these rights has varying conditions pertaining to the 
circumstances in which those rights can be exercised.
    Finally, then the GDPR provides for independent and 
adequately resourced data protection authorities in each EU 
member state. As data protection authorities, we have a very 
broad range of tasks that range from promoting awareness and 
issuing guidance on data protection law, to encouraging 
industry codes of conduct, to handling all valid complaints 
from consumers, and then investigating significant 
infringements of the GDPR.
    The new one stop shop for multinationals under the GDPR 
means that the Irish Data Protection Commission is the lead 
supervisory authority in the EU for the vast majority of U.S. 
global Internet companies such as Facebook, Twitter, WhatsApp, 
Google, AirBnB, and Microsoft as these have their main 
establishment in Ireland.
    The GDPR has introduced a much harder enforcement edge to 
EU data protection law with a range of corrective powers at the 
disposal of data protection authorities in addition to a 
capability to apply fines of up to 4 percent of the worldwide 
turnover of multinationals.
    In the 11 months since GDPR came into application, the 
Irish Data Protection Commission has received in excess of 
5,900 complaints from individuals. It is frequently a feature 
of the complaints we handle from consumers that their interest 
in their personal data is as a means of pursuing further 
litigation or action. So, for example, former employees of 
organizations often seek access to their personal data as part 
of the pursuit of an unfair dismissals case. Consumers may seek 
access to CCTV images in various different scenarios to pursue 
personal injuries cases and so on.
    Overall, the most complained-against sectors in a 
commercial context are retail banks, telecommunications 
companies, and Internet platforms. And my written statement has 
provided you with some specific case studies and examples of 
the complaints we have handled.
    Equally worth mentioning is the complainants to my office 
have rights to appeal and judicially review decisions of the 
Data Protection Commission, and my office is involved in over 
20 litigation cases currently before the Irish courts. And the 
Committee might be interested to know that the vast majority of 
decisions appealed to court from my office relate to disputes 
between employers and employees and far fewer relate to 
commercial contexts.
    Aside then from handling complaints, the Data Protection 
Commission has power to open investigations of its own 
volition, and we have 51 large-scale investigations underway 
covering the large tech platforms, amongst others.
    So in conclusion, the EU data protection law places a very 
strong emphasis on the individual in light of the fundamental 
rights and strong emphasis on the exercise of the rights of the 
individual, and accordingly, it mandates the handling of every 
complaint from an individual by data protection authorities. 
This means the EU data protection authorities play an important 
dual role, on the one hand resolving high volumes of issues for 
individuals and on the other, supervising companies to ensure 
systemic issues of noncompliance are rectified and punished as 
appropriate.
    The GDPR is 11 months old at this point, and clarity and 
consistency of standards will evolve in the coming years, 
driving up overall the standards of protection for consumers in 
every sector.
    Thank you.
    [The prepared statement of Ms. Dixon follows:]

           Prepared Statement of Helen Dixon, Commissioner, 
                 Data Protection Commission of Ireland
Introduction
    Chairman Wicker, Ranking Member Cantwell and Members of the 
Committee, thank you for inviting me to be here today.
    I am pleased to have the opportunity to share with the Committee 
the experience of the Irish Data Protection Commission in dealing with 
complaints from consumers under the General Data Protection Regulation 
or GDPR, applicable since 25th May 2018. Clearly, in a global context, 
the GDPR represents one significant form of regulation of the 
collection and processing of personal data and the Irish Data 
Protection Commission's approach to monitoring and enforcing its 
application provides an early insight into the types of issues raised 
by consumers in complaints about how their personal data is handled.
    It's useful for me to take a few minutes to set in context for you 
the circumstances in which complaints from consumers are lodged with 
the Data Protection Commission.
    The right to have one's personal data protected exists as an 
explicit fundamental right of EU persons under the EU Charter of 
Fundamental Rights that came into legal force in 2009 and the right is 
called out specifically in Article 16 of the Treaty on the Functioning 
of the European Union--the ``Lisbon Treaty''. It is of course not an 
absolute or unlimited right. It may be and often is subject to 
conditions or limitations under EU and member state law but those 
conditions cannot render it impossible for individuals to exercise core 
elements of the right to data protection. The aim equally of a 
consistent and harmonised data protection law across the EU is to 
ensure a level-playing field for all businesses and a consistent 
digital market in which consumers can have trust. While many may argue 
that data privacy is now ``dead'' given the ubiquitous nature of data 
collection in online environments, the Data Protection Commission can 
nonetheless identify the clear benefits to consumers of having 
exercisable and enforceable rights. (Dorraji, 2014)
    The committee is well aware of the basic structure of the GDPR 
which sets out a) obligations on organisations, b) rights for 
individuals, and c) enforcement provisions. As an EU regulation, it has 
direct effect in every EU member state but also has extra-territorial 
reach in that it applies to any overseas company targeting goods or 
services at European consumers.
Obligations
    Under the GDPR, a series of obligations apply to any organisation 
collecting and processing information that relates to an identified or 
identifiable person. A broad definition of personal data is in play 
with the GDPR specifying that identification numbers, location data and 
online identifiers will be sufficient to bring data in scope. The 
obligations on organisations are set down in a series of high-level, 
technology neutral principles: lawfulness, fairness, transparency, 
purpose limitation, data minimisation, accuracy, storage limitation, 
integrity and confidentiality and accountability.
Rights
    In turn, the individuals whose personal data are processed have a 
series of enumerated rights under the GDPR. Incidentally, individuals 
under the GDPR are referenced as ``data subjects'' which is a concept 
far broader than consumers given that the GDPR concerns itself with any 
personal data processing and not merely that which occurs in commercial 
contexts. However, I understand for the purposes of this committee, 
that it is the subset of data subjects that are consumers and service 
users that is of particular interest. The rights of consumers under the 
GDPR are set out in Chapter 3 and cover the right to transparent 
information, the right of access to a copy of their personal data, the 
right to rectification, the right to erasure, the right to restriction 
of data processing, to object to certain processing and the right to 
data portability with varying conditions pertaining to the 
circumstances in which those rights can be exercised. And I will revert 
to these rights shortly when I outline for the committee a profile of 
the complaints from consumers the Data Protection Commission is 
handling where consumers allege those rights are not being delivered on 
by companies.
Enforcement Provisions
    Finally, the GDPR provides for independent and adequately resourced 
data protection authorities in each EU Member State to monitor the 
application of the GDPR and to enforce it (these authorities are 
separate and distinct from the consumer protection and anti-trust 
authorities in the Member States). In this context, data protection 
authorities have a very broad range of tasks from promoting awareness, 
to encouraging industry codes of conduct to receiving notifications of 
the appointment of Data Protection Officers in companies to handling 
complaints from consumers and investigating potential infringements of 
the GDPR.
    In general terms, the individual EU member state data protection 
authorities are obliged to handle every valid complaint from any 
individual in their member state and to supervise establishments in 
their territory. However, because of a new ``one-stop-shop'' innovation 
in the GDPR, multinational organisations operating across the EU can be 
supervised by one lead supervisory authority in the EU member state 
where that multinational has its ``main-establishment''. Equally, any 
individual across the EU may lodge a complaint with the data protection 
authority in the member state of the main establishment of the company 
concerned. As a result, the Irish Data Protection Commission is the 
lead supervisory authority in the EU for the vast majority of U.S. 
global Internet companies such as Facebook, Twitter, WhatsApp, Google, 
AirBnB, Microsoft and Oath as they have their main establishments in 
Ireland. Equally, complaints are lodged with the Irish Commission from 
complainants across the EU either directly or via the supervisory 
authority in their own member state.
    This may seem like a difficult computation given that there are 
potentially up to half a billion consumers in the EU. How can a data 
protection authority with currently 135 staff deal with complaints from 
across the EU and supervise so many large companies? Part of the answer 
lies in the orientation of the GDPR itself which places accountability 
to consumers directly on the shoulders of companies themselves. 
Companies must in many cases appoint Data Protection Officers; they 
must publish contact details for those officers and they must 
administer systems to allow them effectively handle requests from 
consumers to exercise their data protection rights. It's therefore now 
the case that many issues arising for consumers are being resolved 
directly through the intervention of the mandatorily appointed Data 
Protection Officer in the company before there's a need to file a 
complaint with the data protection authority. Many companies we 
supervise report to us that that have had a steep rise in consumer 
requests to exercise rights since the application of the GDPR in May 
2018. Equally, EU data protection authorities can conduct joint 
operations where an authority like the Irish Commission can leverage 
specific expertise in another EU data protection authority in 
conducting an investigation. Further, multiple consumers may often 
raise the same issue as one another which may lead the Data Protection 
Commission to open an investigation of its ``own volition'' in order to 
resolve what may be a systemic matter. Finally, the threat of very 
significant administrative fines hangs over companies that fail to 
implement the principles of GDPR and/or deliver on consumer rights 
under the law with 4 percent of global turnover representing the outer 
but significant limit of fine that may be imposed.
Clearer Standards
    Much of the success over the coming years of the GDPR will derive 
from the evolution of clearer, objective standards to which 
organisations must adhere. These standards will evolve in a number of 
ways:

   Through the embedding of new features of the GDPR such as 
        Codes of Conduct, Certification and Seals that will drive up 
        specific standards in certain sectors. Typically, codes of 
        conduct that industry sectors prepare for the approval of EU 
        data protection authorities will have an independent body 
        appointed by the industry sector to monitor compliance with the 
        code thereby driving up standards of protection and means by 
        which consumers can exercise their rights.

   Through enforcement actions by the Data Protection 
        Commission where the outcome, while specific to the facts of 
        the case examined, will be of precedential value for other 
        organisations. The Data Protection Commission currently has 50 
        large scale investigations running which, as they conclude in 
        the coming months, will serve to set the mark for what is 
        expected of organisations under the principles of transparency, 
        fairness, security and accountability

   Through case law in the national and EU courts, where data 
        protection authority decisions are appealed or in circumstances 
        where individuals use their right of action under the GDPR to 
        claim compensation for any material or non-material damage they 
        have suffered arising from an infringement of the GDPR.

   Through the provision of further guidance to organisations 
        on specific data processing scenarios particularly through 
        published case studies of individual complaints the Data 
        Protection Commission has handled. Equally, guidance will be 
        published off the back of consultations with all stakeholders 
        on how to implement principles in complex scenarios such as 
        those involving children where specific protections and 
        consideration of the evolving capacities of the child need to 
        be factored in.
Consumer Complaints
    In the 11 months since GDPR came into application, the Data 
Protection Commission has received 5839 complaints from individuals. It 
is frequently a feature of complaints we handle from consumers that 
their interest in their personal data is as a means of pursuing further 
litigation or action. For example, former employees of organisations 
often seek access to their personal data as part of the pursuit of an 
unfair dismissals case; consumers seek access to CCTV images in 
different scenarios to pursue personal injuries cases and so on.
    Overall, the most complained against sectors in a commercial 
context are retail banks, telecommunications companies and Internet 
platforms.
    In the cases of the retail banks and telecommunications providers, 
the main issues arising relate to consumer accounts, over-charging, 
failure to keep personal data accurate and up-to-date resulting in mis-
directing of bank or account statements, processing of financial 
information for the purposes of charging after the consumer has 
exercised their right to opt-out during the cooling-off period. While 
you might argue that these are clearly predominantly customer service 
and general consumer issues, it is the processing of their personal 
data and in particular deductions from their bank accounts that bring 
consumers to the door of the Data Protection Commission.
    In terms of the Internet platforms, individuals, as well as Not-
for-profit organisations on their behalf that specialise in data 
protection, raise complaints about the validity of consent collected 
for processing on sign-up to an app or service, the transparency and 
adequacy of the information provided and frequently about non-responses 
from the platforms when they seek to exercise their rights or raise a 
concern. Further, the Data Protection Commission has received several 
complaints about the inability of individuals to procure a full copy of 
their personal data when they request it from a platform. This can 
arise in scenarios where platforms have instituted automated tools to 
allow users by self-service to download their personal data but 
elements of data are not available through the tool. In one such 
complaint we are handling, the user complains that significant personal 
data is held in a data warehouse by a platform and used to enrich the 
user's profile. The platform argues that access to the data is not 
possible because it's stored by date and not individual identifier and 
further that the data would be unintelligible to a consumer because of 
the way it's stored. The Data Protection Commission must resolve 
whether this is personal data to which a right of access applies.
    Other cases dealt with this year by the office relate to financial 
lenders required to notify details to the Irish Central Bank of credit 
given to individual consumers. Certain lenders notified the details 
twice resulting in adverse credit ratings for the individuals as they 
appeared to have 2 or 3 times the number of loans as compared to what 
they actually had. In another case, a multinational agent dealing by 
web chat with a service user about a customer service complaint took 
note, according to the complaint received by the office, of the 
consumer's personal details including mobile `phone number she used to 
verify her account and contacted the user asking her on a date. That 
didn't turn out to be a happily-ever-after story when independently of 
the investigation of my office, the agent was removed from his job!
    A further complaint dealt with was lodged by an individual who had 
suffered a family bereavement. A tombstone company issued immediate 
correspondence to her family advertising cheap headstones in respect of 
the dead relative. The tombstone company had taken data from an online 
death notice website and recreated the full address from multiple other 
sources. The actions of the company were not only distasteful but in 
breach of the purpose limitation requirements of data protection law.
    A particularly concerning case was reported to the office six 
months ago concerning a mobile `phone user whose ex-partner had managed 
to verify identity with her mobile telephone provider by masquerading 
as the individual herself and gained control of her telephone number. 
He did this by contacting the telco via web chat and when asked to 
identify himself, he provided her name and mobile `phone number. He 
then told the customer service agent at the telco that he (masquerading 
as her) had lost his mobile `phone, had now purchased a new SIM card 
and requested that the `phone number be ported over to the new SIM he 
had bought. The agent asked the imposter the following verification 
questions:

   What is your full address? Answered correctly

   What are 3 frequently dialled numbers? Could not answer

   Can you tell me your last top-up date? Could not answer

   Can you tell me your last top-up amount? Answered correctly

    Despite the imposter not answering all of the questions, the agent 
accepted this as valid authentication, and ported the complainant's 
number onto the imposter's newly bought SIM card. This gave access to 
any future texts and calls coming to the complainant's phone number. 
This would allow for example the imposter to bypass the `phone number 
factor for authentication with her online banking account. In this 
case, the telco had failed to adhere to its own standards for 
verification of identity with very unfortunate consequences.
    Parallel but overlapping laws to the GDPR specific to E-Privacy are 
equally enforced by the Data Protection Commission and annually the 
office prosecutes a range of companies for multiple offences. In the 
majority of cases, these relate to targeting of mobile `phone users 
with marketing SMS messages without their consent and/or without 
providing the user with an OPT OUT from the marketing messages. 
Equally, a number of companies are prosecuted annually where they offer 
an OPT OUT but fail to apply it on their database resulting in the user 
continuing to receive SMS messages without their consent. As a result 
of several years of consistent high-profile prosecutions in this area, 
the Data Protection Commission considers the rate of compliance appears 
to be improving.
    Considerable resources of the office have been applied in recent 
years to a series of investigations into the ``Private Investigator'' 
sector. The Data Protection Commission received complaints from 
individuals who had lodged claims with their insurance providers and 
later became concerned about how their insurance company had sourced 
particular information about them and used it to deny their claims. The 
Data Protection Commission uncovered a broad-ranging national ``scam'' 
involving a considerable number of private investigator or tracing 
companies that had been either bribing or blagging government officials 
and utility company staff in some cases to procure a range of pieces of 
personal information about the claimants. 5 companies and 4 company 
directors were successfully prosecuted by the Data Protection 
Commission for these data protection offences over the last 4 to 5 
years.
    The final case I'll mention in a commercial context is the case of 
an individual who suffered an accident giving rise to a leg injury. 
When her claim to her insurance company was denied, she sought access 
to a copy of her personal data that had been used by the company to 
deny her claim as she was surprised at the reasons given. She 
discovered on receipt of her personal data, that her family doctor had, 
instead of sending a report detailing information about the nature of 
her leg injury suffered in the recent accident, sent the entire file of 
30 plus years of consultations between him and the patient to the 
insurance company. The company used very sensitive information about 
another condition the woman had suffered from years previously to deny 
the claim. Aside from the denial of the claim, the complainant suffered 
considerable distress at the thought of a very sensitive and irrelevant 
set of information about her having been disclosed and then processed 
in this matter. This office found the family doctor had infringed data 
protection law in disclosing excessive personal data including 
sensitive personal data. Ultimately, this complainant pursued a civil 
claim for compensation in the courts and the case settled on the steps 
of the court.
    Outside of these commercial contexts, a large volume of complaints 
that come to the Commission relate to, for example, employees 
complaining about their employers using excessive CCTV to monitor them 
or unauthorised access and excessive processing of their image if the 
employer uses CCTV as part of disciplinary proceedings. Each of these 
cases has to be examined on its specific facts with consideration given 
to the proportionality of processing in the given circumstances.
    The most frequent category of complaint relates to access requests 
where an individual considers they have been denied access to a copy of 
the personal data they requested from an organisation. In the majority 
of cases, the Data Protection Commission amicably resolves these cases 
which in an access request scenario means we ensure the individual 
receives all of the personal data to which they're entitled. This may 
of course be less than they sought as an organisation may legitimately 
apply exemptions where it is lawful to do so.
    The Committee will be well aware of various academic studies on the 
so-called ``privacy paradox'' where discrepancies between our attitudes 
as online users and our behaviours are apparent. This is a complex area 
of study but I raise it by way of pointing out that consumer complaints 
alone may not give us a very complete picture of what concerns 
consumers or what elements of the controls provided by platforms are 
useful to them. The platforms don't publish data on user engagement 
with their privacy control dashboards and the frequency with which 
users complete ``privacy checkup'' routines prompted by the platforms 
but based on data they have shared with the Data Protection Commission, 
the number of users seeking to engage with and control their settings 
is significant. Of course, this leads us then to the issues raised by 
Dr Zeynef Tufecki in the recent New York Times privacy series on 
whether being ``discreet'' online protects users and where she 
concludes that powerful computational inferences make it unlikely 
discretion is of much assistance. (Tufekci, 2019) Academic Woodrow 
Hartzog equally argues against idealising a concept of control as a 
goal of data protection. (Hartzog, 2018)
Large-scale Investigations
    This brings me then to the important work of the Data Protection 
Commission outside of the role in handling complaints from individuals. 
In many ways, effective implementation of principles of fairness, 
transparency, data minimisation and privacy by design will negate the 
need for users and consumers to have the responsibility for ensuring 
their own protection thrust entirely upon them through making decisions 
about whether to ``consent'' or not.
    The Data Protection Commission has powers to open an investigation 
of its own volition or may opt to open an investigation into a 
complaint from an individual that discloses what appears to be a 
systemic issue that potentially affects hundreds of millions of users.
    The Data Protection Commission has currently 51 large-scale 
investigations underway. 17 relate to the large tech platforms and span 
the services of Apple, Facebook, LinkedIn, Twitter, WhatsApp and 
Instagram. Because the GDPR is principles-based and doesn't explicitly 
prohibit any commercial forms of personal data processing, each case 
must be proved by tracing the application of the principles in the GDPR 
to the processing scenario at issue and demonstrating the basis upon 
which the Commission alleges there is a gap between the standard we say 
the GDPR anticipates and that which the company has implemented. The 
first sets of investigations will conclude over the summer of 2019.
Redress
    EU data protection authorities resolve complaints of individuals 
amicably for the most part and where amicable resolution is not 
possible, the action of the authority is directed against the 
processing organisation. Authorities do not order redress in the form 
of payment of damages to individuals whose rights have been infringed.
    In order to secure damages, individuals have a right of action 
under Article 82 GDPR where they or a not-for-profit representing them 
can bring a case through the courts to seek compensation for material 
or non-material damage they allege they have suffered as a result of 
infringements of the GDPR. Such Article 82 actions for compensation by 
individuals in the Irish courts have not yet been heard but when these 
are, they will represent further clarifications on how the courts view 
the GDPR and its application.
    No class action system exists in Ireland and in general this is not 
a feature of the EU landscape. While there are some reports emanating 
particularly from the UK that representative actions are being lined up 
by some law firms on a ``no win no fee'' basis post large-scale 
breaches being notified, nothing of significance has materialised in 
this regard. (Osborne Clarke--GDPR one year on: how are EU regulators 
flexing their muscles and what should you be thinking about now?)
Conclusion
    EU data protection law places a strong emphasis on the individual 
and the exercise of their rights and accordingly mandates the handling 
of every complaint from an individual by data protection authorities. 
This means EU data protection authorities play an important dual role--
on the one hand, resolving high volumes of issues for individuals and 
on the other supervising companies to ensure systemic issues of non-
compliance are rectified and punished as appropriate. The GDPR is 11 
months old and clarity and consistency of standards will evolve in the 
coming years driving up standards of data protection for consumers in 
every sector.
References
    Dorraji, S. E. (2014). Privacy in Digital Age: Dead or Alive?! 
Regarding the New EU Data Protection Regulations. SOCIALINES 
TECHNOLOGIJOS SOCIAL TECHNOLOGIES 2014, 4(2), 306-317.
    Hartzog, W. (2018, Volume 4 Issue 4). The Case Against Idealising 
Control. European Data Protection Law Review .
    (n.d.). Osborne Clarke--GDPR one year on: how are EU regulators 
flexing their muscles and what should you be thinking about now? 2019 
Lexology: daily subscriber feed.
    Tufekci, Z. (2019, April 21). Think You're Discreet Online? Think 
Again. New York Times.

    The Chairman. Thank you very much, Ms. Dixon.
    Mr. Polonetsky.

STATEMENT OF JULES POLONETSKY, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, FUTURE 
                        OF PRIVACY FORUM

    Mr. Polonetsky. Thank you, Chairman Wicker, Ranking Member 
Cantwell, Committee members.
    Eighteen years ago, I left my job as the New York Consumer 
Affairs Commissioner to become one of the first wave of Chief 
Privacy Officers when that was yet a novel title. Today as CEO 
of FPF, I work with the CPOs of more than 150 companies, with 
academics, with civil society, and with leading foundations on 
the privacy challenges posed by tech innovations.
    I first testified before this Committee almost 20 years ago 
to address privacy concerns around behavioral advertising. And 
almost every day since, we have seen those reports of new 
intrusions, new risks, new boundaries crossed. Sometimes it is 
simply a company being creepy. Sometimes it is a practice that 
raises serious risks to civil liberties or our sense of 
autonomy.
    It is long past time to put a privacy law in place that can 
support that trust that Americans should have when they use 
their phones, when they surf the Internet, when they shop 
online, all of the activities of daily life. Every day we 
delay, it becomes harder. New businesses launch. New 
technologies are developed and become entrenched.
    At the same time, we are, of course, benefiting from many 
of these technologies, as you both mentioned, companies 
reinventing mobility and making transportation safer. Machine 
learning has been built into so many of the products and 
services, health care diagnosis, education tech providers 
working on personalized learning. Every one of these holds 
great promise. Every one of them also brings new perils.
    It is a global challenge, of course, and almost every 
leading economy, not just our European colleagues, have put 
comprehensive laws in place. Japan. We should take special note 
perhaps of the APEC CBPRs, the Asia-Pacific region where the 
U.S. has played a long role and which we have recently 
committed to in the proposed treaty for trade between U.S., 
Mexico, and Canada. We should not be left behind as the 
standards that are actually defining technologies today and the 
terms of trade for a decade to come are being established. Even 
small businesses do business globally today via the Web and 
need that guidance.
    So a baseline law should have strong protections matching 
and exceeding the key rights of California's privacy law: 
transparency, access, deletion, the right to object, 
protections for minors, the right to object to sales of data. 
But we also need to add some of the other core privacy 
principles that are not included in CCPA. Compatible use, 
contexts, special restrictions on sensitive data, the full 
range of fair information practices, as they have been 
reflected in so many of the national and international models, 
and many which originated back in the 1970s in the U.S. should 
be in our law.
    In drafting, we should be clear about what is covered. If 
we do not know what is personal, we do not know what is in and 
what is out. But I would argue that this is not a binary in or 
out decision. Information is not either completely explicitly 
personal and it is probably never completely anonymous. There 
are stages of data, and a law that is careful would nuance 
different levels of rights and restrictions based on whether 
data is fully anonymous, whether it is pseudonymous. The actual 
different stages in the lifestyle are the best way to match the 
corresponding requirements.
    Research has not always been handled well in a number of 
the legislative models around the world. We want to, I think, 
encourage beneficial research if it is being carried out in a 
way that supports privacy, fairness, equity, the integrity of 
the scientific process. We should encourage legitimate research 
when the appropriate ethical reviews are in place.
    And at the end of the day, internal accountability 
mechanisms are how organizations actually make sure they follow 
the law. We do not want just privacy in the law. We want it on 
the ground. We want privacy by design, and that means employees 
that are trained. That means tools and systems that support 
responsible data stewardship. So laws should encourage 
comprehensive programs, and whenever possible, we should 
incentivize PETs, privacy enhancing technologies, that deliver 
us perhaps the benefits of data while making sure that we have 
strong mathematical proofs that we have minimized any risks.
    And of course, any law is going to impact the sectoral 
State privacy laws that have been passed in recent decades. We 
certainly should avoid a framework where a website operator or 
a small business should have to deal with a complexity of 
inconsistent State mandates on many of the day-to-day issues of 
operating a business. But these concerns can be reasonably 
avoided with carefully crafted Federal preemption. There are 
clearly core State privacy laws that can and must exist, 
student privacy laws and others, and that I think is an 
important challenge for the Committee.
    But laws are only as good as enforcement. The FTC should 
have not only the civil penalties, not only the careful 
targeted rulemaking, but it also should have education and 
outreach so that new businesses understand, can get their 
questions answered. The FTC needs both the carrot and the 
stick.
    And of course, State AGs, who have been such critical 
partners to our Federal leaders, should continue to have a 
role.
    Thank you for the chance to share those thoughts with you 
today.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Polonetsky follows:]

   Prepared Statement of Jules Polonetsky, Chief Executive Officer, 
                        Future of Privacy Forum
    Thank you for inviting me to speak today. The Future of Privacy 
Forum is a non-profit organization that serves as a catalyst for 
privacy leadership and scholarship, advancing principled data practices 
in support of emerging technologies. We are supported by leading 
foundations, as well as by more than 150 companies, with an advisory 
board representing academics, industry, and civil society.\1\ We bring 
together privacy officers, academics, consumer advocates, and other 
thought leaders to explore the challenges posed by technological 
innovation and develop privacy protections, ethical norms, and workable 
business practices.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ The views herein do not necessarily reflect those of our 
supporters or our Advisory Board. See Future of Privacy Forum, Advisory 
Board, https://fpf.org/about/advisory-board/; Supporters, https://
fpf.org/about/supporters/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    I speak to you today with a sense of urgency. Congress should 
advance a baseline, comprehensive Federal privacy law because the 
impact of data-intensive technologies on individuals and vulnerable 
communities is increasing every day as the pace of innovation 
accelerates. Each day's news brings reports of a new intrusion, new 
risk, new harm, another boundary crossed. Sometimes it's a company 
doing something that consumers or critics regard as ``creepy;'' 
sometimes it is a practice that raises serious risks to our human 
rights, or civil liberties, or our sense of autonomy. There is a 
growing public awareness of how data-driven systems can reflect or 
reinforce discrimination and bias, even inadvertently.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \2\ Virginia Eubanks, Automating Inequality: How High-Tech Tools 
Profile, Police, and Punish the Poor (2018).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    For many people, personal privacy is a deeply emotional issue, and 
a real or perceived absence of privacy may leave them feeling 
vulnerable, exposed, or deprived of control. For others, concrete 
financial or other harm may occur; a loss of autonomy, a stifling of 
creativity due to feeling surveilled, or the public disclosure of 
highly sensitive information like individuals' financial data or 
disability status are just some potential consequences of technology 
misuse, poor data security policies, or insufficient privacy 
controls.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \3\ Lauren Smith, Unfairness By Algorithm: Distilling the Harms of 
Automated Decision-Making (Dec 11, 2017), Future of Privacy Forum, 
https://fpf.org/2017/12/11/unfairness-by-algorithm-distilling-the-
harms-of-automated-decision-making/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    At the same time, individuals and society are benefitting from new 
technologies and novel uses of data. Companies reinventing mobility are 
making transportation safer and more accessible; healthcare providers 
are using real-world evidence to advance research; and education 
technology providers can empower students and teachers to enhance and 
personalize learning.\4\ In much the same way that electricity faded 
from novelty to background during the industrialization of modern life 
100 years ago, we see artificial intelligence and machine learning 
becoming the foundation of commonly available products and services, 
like voice-activated digital assistants, traffic routing, and accurate 
healthcare diagnoses.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \4\ Future of Privacy Forum, Policymaker's Guide to Student Data 
Privacy, (April 4, 2019), FERPA/Sherpa, https://ferpasherpa.org/
policymakersguide/.
    \5\ Brenda Leong & Maria Navin, Artificial Intelligence: Privacy 
Promise or Peril? (February 20, 2019), Future of Privacy Forum, https:/
/fpf.org/2019/02/20/artificial-intelligence-privacy-promise-or-peril.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Each of these examples holds the promise of improving our lives but 
each one also poses the risk of new and sometimes unforeseen harms. It 
is in the best interests of individuals and organizations for national 
lawmakers speak in a united, bipartisan voice to create uniform 
protections that help rebuild trust. Congress has the opportunity now 
to pass a law that will shape these developments to maximize the 
benefits of data for society while mitigating risks. Delaying 
Congressional action means that businesses will inevitably continue to 
develop new models, build infrastructure, and deploy technologies, 
without the guidance and clear limits that only Congress can set forth.
    This is a global challenge, and other countries have responded. The 
European Union (EU) has substantially updated its data protection 
framework, the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR),\6\ and Japan 
has made substantial updates to its data protection law, the Act on 
Protection of Personal Information (APPI).\7\ The EU and Japan have 
also announced a trade agreement that includes a reciprocal data 
adequacy determination, creating the world's largest exchange of safe 
data flows and boosting digital trade between the two zones.\8\ Other 
nations, from India \9\ to Brazil,\10\ are passing privacy laws or 
updating existing data protection regimes.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \6\ Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the 
Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons with 
regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of 
such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection 
Regulation), https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2016/679/oj
    \7\ Japanese Act on Protection of Personal Information (Act No. 57/
2003).
    \8\ Press Release: European Commission adopts adequacy decision on 
Japan, creating the world's largest area of safe data flows, European 
Commission (Jan. 23 2019), http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-19-
421_en.htm
    \9\ Mayuran Palanisamy and Ravin Nandle, Understanding India's 
Draft Data Protection Bill (Sep 13, 2018), IAPP Privacy Tracker, 
https://iapp.org/news/a/understanding-indias-draft-
data-protection-bill.
    \10\ Lei 13.709/18, Lei Geral de Protecao de Dados Pessoais (Brazil 
General Data Protection Law).
    \11\ Data Privacy Law: The Top Global Developments in 2018 and What 
2019 May Bring, DLA Piper (Feb. 23 2019), https://www.dlapiper.com/en/
us/insights/publications/2019/02/data-privacy-law-2018-2019/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Current business practices along with new technologies are being 
shaped by laws around the world, while the U.S. approach to data 
protection remains outdated and insufficient. The continuation of 
cross-border data flows, which are crucial to the United States' 
leadership role in the global digital economy, are under stress. This 
may put U.S. companies, from financial institutions to cloud providers, 
at a disadvantage due to the perception that our laws are inadequate. 
Congress must ensure that the U.S. is not left behind as the rest of 
the world establishes trade and privacy frameworks that will de facto 
define the terms of international information and technology transfers 
for decades to come.
    The United States currently does not have a baseline set of legal 
protections that apply to all commercial data about individuals 
regardless of the particular industry, technology, or user base. For 
the past decades, we have taken a sectoral approach to privacy that has 
led to the creation of Federal laws that provide strong protections 
only in certain sectors such as surveillance,\12\ healthcare,\13\ video 
rentals,\14\ education records,\15\ and children's privacy.\16\ As a 
result, U.S. Federal laws currently provide strong privacy and security 
protection for information that is often particularly sensitive about 
individuals but it leaves other  sometimes similar  
data largely unregulated aside from the FTC's Section 5 authority to 
enforce against deceptive or unfair business practices.\17\ For 
example, health records held by hospitals and covered by the Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)\18\ are subject to 
strong privacy and security rules, but health-related or fitness data 
held by app developers or online advertising companies is not covered 
by HIPAA and is largely unregulated. Student data held by schools and 
covered by the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA)\19\ is 
subject to Federal privacy safeguards, but similar data held by 
educational apps unaffiliated with schools is not subject to special 
protections. The Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA)\20\ helps ensure the 
accuracy of third-party information used to grant or deny loans, but 
FCRA's accuracy requirements do not apply to similar third-party 
reviews used to generate user reputation scores on online services.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \12\ Electronic Communications Privacy Act (ECPA), 18 U.S.C. 
Sec. 2510-22.
    \13\ Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 
(HIPAA), P.L. No. 104-191, 110 Stat. 1938 (1996).
    \14\ Video Privacy Protection Act of 1988 (VPPA), 18 U.S.C. 
Sec. 2710.
    \15\ Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA), 20 U.S.C. 
Sec. 1232g.
    \16\ Children's Online Privacy Protection Act of 1998 (COPPA), 15 
U.S.C. Sec. Sec. 6501-6506.
    \17\ Section 5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act, 15 U.S.C. 
Sec. 45(a).
    \18\ Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 
(HIPAA), 45 CFR Sec. 164.524.
    \19\ Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA), 20 U.S.C. 
Sec. 1232g.
    \20\ Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA), 15 U.S.C. Sec. 1681.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The U.S. has not always lagged behind its major trade partners in 
privacy and data protection policymaking. In fact, the central 
universal tenets of data protection have U.S. roots. In 1972, the 
Department of Health, Education, and Welfare formed an Advisory 
Committee on Automated Data Systems, which released a report setting 
forth a code of Fair Information Practices.\21\ These principles, 
widely known as the Fair Information Practice Principles (FIPPs), are 
the foundation of not only existing U.S. laws but also many 
international frameworks and laws, including GDPR.\22\ And while GDPR 
is the most recent major international legislative effort, the U.S. 
should look for interoperability with and insights from the OECD 
Privacy Guidelines \23\ and the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation 
(APEC) framework and Cross-Border Privacy Rules (CBPRs).\24\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \21\ Records, Computer, and the Rights of Citizens: Report of the 
Secretary's Advisory Committee on Automated Personal Data Systems, U.S. 
Dept. of Health & Human Services (1973), https://aspe.hhs.gov/report/
records-computers-and-rights-citizens.
    \22\ Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the 
Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons with 
regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of 
such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection 
Regulation), https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2016/679/oj.
    \23\ Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, 
Privacy Guidelines, https://www.oecd.org/internet/ieconomy/privacy-
guidelines.htm
    \24\ APEC has 21 members comprising nearly all of the Asian-Pacific 
economies, including the United States, China and Russia. The CBPR 
system--endorsed by APEC member economies in 2011 and updated in 2015 
attempts to create a regional solution across 21 member economies, 
whose governments are at different stages of compliance with the APEC 
Privacy Framework. In the United States, the Federal Trade Commission 
has agreed to enforce the CBPRs. Eight APEC countries have formally 
joined the CBPR system--United States, Canada, Mexico, Japan, 
Singapore, Taiwan, Australia and the Republic of Korea. In the recent 
United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA), which Congress is 
reviewing as it considers ratification, the three countries promote 
cross-border data flows by recognizing the CBPR system as a valid data 
privacy compliance mechanism for data-transfers between the countries. 
See Cross-Border Privacy Rules System, http://cbprs.org/ (last visited 
Apr. 28, 2019). Also relevant for the Committee's reference is 
Convention 108 of the Council of Europe, an international data 
protection treaty that has been signed by 54 countries to date, not 
including the United States.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    As privacy concerns continue to escalate, states around the U.S. 
are charging ahead, proposing, passing, or updating consumer privacy 
laws.\25\ Many of these laws are serious, nuanced efforts to provide 
individuals with meaningful privacy rights and give companies clarity 
regarding their compliance obligations. At the same time, multiple, 
inconsistent state law requirements risk creating a conflicting 
patchwork of laws that create uncertainty for organizations that handle 
personal information. Individuals deserve consistent privacy 
protections regardless of the state they happen to reside in.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \25\ See Mitchell Noordyke, U.S. State Comprehensive Privacy Law 
Comparison, IAPP (April 18, 2019), https://iapp.org/news/a/us-state-
comprehensive-privacy-law-comparison/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The U.S. has a shrinking window of opportunity to regain momentum 
at both the national and international level. If we wait too long, more 
countries and states will act, which will have an immediate impact on 
new technologies and business initiatives and ultimately reduce the 
impact of any Federal law.
    There are key points that need to be addressed with particular care 
in any Federal consumer privacy law. A baseline Federal privacy law 
should offer strong protections.\26\ This, in turn, will bolster trust 
in privacy and security practices. The law will regulate a substantial 
share of the U.S. economy, and must therefore be drafted with careful 
attention to its effects on every sector as well as a wide range of 
communities, stakeholders, and individuals.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \26\ Leading scholars and advocates have expressed skepticism about 
market-based responses to privacy and security concerns. Common 
criticisms of a purely market-driven approach include: consumers' lack 
of technical sophistication with respect to data security (See, e.g., 
Aaron Smith, What the Public Knows About Cybersecurity, Pew Research 
Center (Mar. 22, 2017), http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/03/22/what-the-
public-knows-about-cybersecurity/ (last accessed on Nov. 9, 2018); the 
typical length and substance of modern privacy notices (See e.g., 
Aleecia M. McDonald and Lorrie Faith Cranor, The Cost of Reading 
Privacy Policies, I/S: A Journal of Law and Policy for the Information 
Society, at 8-10, (2008)); research suggesting that most individuals do 
not adequately value future risks (See e.g., Chris Jay Hoofnagle & 
Jennifer M. Urban, Alan Westin's Privacy Homo Economicus, 49 Wake 
Forest L. Rev. 261, 303-05 (2014)); the design of user interfaces to 
encourage decisions that are not aligned with users' best interests 
(See Woodrow Hartzog, Privacy's Blueprint: The Battle to Control the 
Design of New Technologies (2018)); and a lack of sufficient 
protections for privacy as an economic externality or ``public good'' 
(Joshua A. T. Fairfield and Christoph Engel, Privacy As A Public Good, 
65 Duke L.J. 385, 423-25 (2015)).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Eighteen years ago, I left my job as the New York City Consumer 
Affairs Commissioner to become one of the first company chief privacy 
officers (CPO) in the U.S. Working for eight years in privacy and 
consumer protection roles at major tech companies helped me understand 
that it takes people, systems, and tools to manage data protection 
compliance. I have also served as a state legislator and a 
Congressional staffer, and today at FPF work with companies, 
foundations, academics, regulators, and civil society to seek practical 
solutions to privacy problems. With this perspective, gained from my 
experience with key stakeholder groups and ongoing focus on the 
protection of privacy of individuals and consumers, I offer the 
following views.
1. Covered Data and Personal Information Under a Federal Privacy Law
    In drafting baseline Federal privacy legislation, the most 
important decision is one of scope: how should the law define the 
``personal information'' that is to be protected? Laws that adopt an 
overly broad standard are forced to include numerous exceptions in 
order to accommodate necessary or routine business activities, such as 
fraud detection, security, or compliance with legal obligations; or to 
anticipate future uses of data, such as scientific research or machine 
learning. Conversely, laws that define personal information too 
narrowly risk creating gaps that allow risky uses of data to go 
unregulated.
    Leading government and industry guidelines recognize that data has 
a range of linkability where it can potentially be used to identify or 
contact an individual or to customize content to an individual person 
or device.\27\ A Federal privacy law should avoid classifying covered 
data in a binary manner as either ``personal'' or ``anonymous.'' 
Instead, it should draw distinctions between different states of data 
given their materially different privacy risks. Context matters. 
Personal data that is intended to be made public should be regulated 
differently than personal data that will be kept confidential by an 
organization.\28\ Similarly, data that is out in the wild should not be 
treated the same as data that is subject to technical deidentification 
controls (such as redacting identifiers, adding random noise, or 
aggregating records) as well as to effective legal and administrative 
safeguards (such as commitments not to attempt to re-identify 
individuals or institutional access limitations).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \27\ According to the Federal Trade Commission (FTC), data are not 
``reasonably linkable'' to individual identity to the extent that a 
company: (1) takes reasonable measures to ensure that the data are 
deidentified; (2) publicly commits not to try to re-identify the data; 
and (3) contractually prohibits downstream recipients from trying to 
re-identify the data (the ``Three-Part Test''). Federal Trade 
Commission, Protection Consumer Privacy In An Era of Rapid Change 
(2012), at 21, https://www.ftc.gov/sites/default/files/documents/
reports/federal-trade-commission-report-protecting-consumerprivacy-era-
rapid-change-recommendations/120326privacyreport.pdf. According to the 
National Institute of Sciences and Technology (NIST), ``all data exist 
on an identifiability spectrum. At one end (the left) are data that are 
not related to individuals (for example, historical weather records) 
and therefore pose no privacy risk. At the other end (the right) are 
data that are linked directly to specific individuals. Between these 
two endpoints are data that can be linked with effort, that can only be 
linked to groups of people, and that are based on individuals but 
cannot be linked back.'' Simson L. Garfinkel, NISTIR 8053, De-
Identification of Personal Information (Oct. 2015), at 5, http://
nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ir/2015/NIST.IR.8053.pdf. Leading industry 
associations provide similar guidelines. See, e.g., Digital Advertising 
Alliance, Self-Regulatory Principles for Multi-Site Data (Nov 2011), at 
8, available at http://www.aboutads.info/resource/download/Multi-Site-
Data-Principles.pdf (considering data to be deidentified ``when an 
entity has taken reasonable steps to ensure that the data cannot 
reasonably be re-associated or connected to an individual or connected 
to or be associated with a particular computer or device.'').
    \28\ See, e.g., Netflix Prize, Netflix, https://
www.netflixprize.com/ (last accessed April 28, 2019) (releasing data 
publicly as part of a contest to improve user recommendations); Arvind 
Narayanan & Vitaly Shmatikov, Robust De-anonymization of Large Sparse 
Datasets (2018), https://www.cs.utexas.edu/shmat/
shmat_oak08netflix.pdf (re-identifying records of known Netflix users).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    FPF has crafted modular draft statutory language that attempts to 
capture these distinctions.\29\ We believe, in broad terms, that 
categories of data that are exposed to individual privacy and security 
risks, yet materially different in their potential uses and impact, 
include:\30\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \29\ See Appendix D.
    \30\ See generally, Jules Polonetsky, Omer Tene, & Kelsey Finch, 
Shades of Gray: Seeing the Full Spectrum of Practical Data De-
identification, Santa Clara L. Rev. (2016); A Visual Guide to Practical 
De-identification, Future of Privacy Forum, https://fpf.org/2016/04/25/
a-visual-guide-to-practical-data-de-identification/.

   Identified data: information explicitly linked to a known 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
        individual.

   Identifiable data: information that is not explicitly linked 
        to a known individual but can practicably be linked by the data 
        holder or others who may lawfully access the information.

   Pseudonymous data: information that cannot be linked to a 
        known individual without additional information kept 
        separately.

   deidentified data: (i) data from which direct and indirect 
        identifiers \31\ have been permanently removed; (ii) data that 
        has been perturbed to the degree that the risk of re-
        identification is small, given the context of the data set; or 
        (iii) data that an expert has confirmed poses a very small risk 
        that information can be used by an anticipated recipient to 
        identify an individual.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \31\ Direct identifiers are data that directly identifies a single 
individual, for example names, social security numbers, and e-mail 
addresses. Indirect identifiers are data that by themselves do not 
identify a specific individual but that can be aggregated and 
``linked'' with other information to identify data subjects, for 
example birth dates, ZIP codes, and demographic information. Simson L. 
Garfinkel, NISTIR 8053, De-Identification of Personal Information (Oct. 
2015), at 15, 19, http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ir/2015/
NIST.IR.8053.pdf.

    By recognizing such distinctions, Federal privacy legislation would 
craft tiers of safeguards that are commensurate to privacy risks while 
at the same time allowing for greater flexibility where it is 
warranted. For example, on the one hand, appropriate regulatory 
requirements for deidentified data might mandate that companies cannot 
make such data public or share it with third parties without technical, 
administrative, and/or legal controls that reasonably prevent re-
identification. But it may be appropriate to exempt deidentified data 
from other requirements, such as providing users with access or 
portability rights or the right to object to or opt-out of a company's 
use of deidentified data, since by definition it is not technically 
feasible to link deidentified data to a particular, verifiable 
individual. On the other hand, for pseudonymous or identifiable data 
that can be reasonably linked to a known individual, it may be more 
fitting to provide individuals with access and portability rights, or 
the ability to opt-in or opt-out of certain uses of that data, as 
appropriate.
    In many cases, the ability to reduce the identifiability of 
personal data through technical, legal, and administrative measures 
will allow a company to retain some utility of data (e.g., for 
research, as we discuss below),\32\ while significantly reducing 
privacy risks. New advances in deidentification and related privacy-
enhancing technologies (PETs) (discussed below at number 5) are 
continuing to emerge.\33\ As a result, it is wise for lawmakers to take 
account of the many states of data and to provide incentives for 
companies to use technical measures and effective controls reduce the 
identifiability of personal data wherever appropriate.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \32\ See section 3 below.
    \33\ See section 5 below.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
2. Sensitive Data
    The term sensitive data is used to refer to certain categories of 
personal data that require additional protections due to the greater 
risks for harm posed by processing or disclosing this data. While 
individuals should generally be able to exercise reasonable control 
over their personal information, those controls should be stronger with 
respect to sensitive data. Thus, a Federal privacy law should provide 
heightened protections for the collection, use, storage, and disclosure 
of users' sensitive personal information or personal information used 
in sensitive contexts. FPF has crafted modular draft statutory language 
that proposes a practical approach to regulating sensitive data that is 
consistent with current norms and best practices.\34\ The Federal Trade 
Commission has defined sensitive data to include, at a minimum, data 
about children, financial and health information, Social Security 
numbers, and precise geolocation data.\35\ The GDPR defines sensitive 
data more broadly by recognizing special categories of personal data as 
``personal data revealing racial or ethnic origin, political opinions, 
religious or philosophical beliefs, or trade union membership, and the 
processing of genetic data, biometric data for the purpose of uniquely 
identifying a natural person, data concerning health or data concerning 
a natural person's sex life or sexual orientation.'' \36\ Under GDPR, 
the legal grounds for processing these special categories of data are 
more restricted.\37\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \34\ See Appendix D.
    \35\ Federal Trade Commission, Protection Consumer Privacy In An 
Era of Rapid Change (2012), at 8, 58-60. https://www.ftc.gov/sites/
default/files/documents/reports/federal-trade-commission-report-
protecting-consumer-privacy-era-rapid-change-recommendations/
120326privacyreport
.pdf.
    \36\ GDPR, Article 9.
    \37\ GDPR, Article 9, Recital 51-52.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    In addition to opt-in controls, Federal legislation should include 
additional requirements--such as purpose limitation and respect for 
context--for certain sensitive categories of data. For example, if 
information such as a user's precise geolocation or health information 
is collected with affirmative consent for one purpose (such as 
providing a location-based ridesharing service, or a fitness tracking 
app), a law should restrict sharing that sensitive, identifiable 
information with third parties for materially different purposes 
without user consent. This is consistent with the choice principle in 
the FTC's 2012 Report, which urged companies to offer the choice at the 
point in time, and in a context, in which a consumer is making a 
decision about his or her data.\38\ There may be instances where 
sensitive data will require consent, and where such consent will be 
impossible to obtain.\39\ The law should provide for the creation of a 
transparent, independent ethical review process that can assess such 
cases and provide a basis for a decision that a use of data is 
beneficial and will not result in harm.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \38\ Federal Trade Commission, Protection Consumer Privacy In An 
Era of Rapid Change (2012), at 60. https://www.ftc.gov/sites/default/
files/documents/reports/federal-trade-commission-report-protecting-
consumer-privacy-era-rapid-change-recommendations/
120326privacyreport.pdf.
    \39\ For example, recruiting individuals for rare disease drug 
trials.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
3. Research
    It is vital that a national privacy law be crafted in a way that 
does not unduly restrict socially beneficial research, and that 
policymakers at the local, state, and Federal levels continue to have 
the information they need to make evidence-based decisions. Today, in 
addition to the entities governed by the HIPAA Rule and legal mandates 
around human subject research,\40\ many private companies also conduct 
research, or work in partnerships with academic researchers, to gain 
important insights from the data they hold.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \40\ 45 CFR 46 (amended 2018). Currently, 20 U.S. agencies and 
departments intend to follow the revised Common Rule and their CFR 
numbers. See U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, Federal Policy 
for the Protection of Human Subject (`Common Rule') https://
www.hhs.gov/ohrp/regulations-and-policy/regulations/common-rule/
index.html (last visited Mar. 8, 2019).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    While obtaining individuals' informed consent may be feasible in 
controlled research settings, it is often impossible or impractical for 
researchers studying databases that contain the footprints of millions, 
or indeed billions, of data subjects. For example, when researchers are 
studying the effectiveness of personalized learning tools or evaluating 
disparate impacts of automated systems, they can benefit from access to 
large datasets. Legal mandates that require data holders to obtain 
continual permission from individuals for future uses of data--while 
appropriate in many commercial contexts--may create undue burdens for 
researchers who rely on datasets that contain information about 
individuals who cannot be contacted or who have been deidentified, 
particularly if researchers do not know, at the point of collection, 
what insights future studies may reveal.
    This does not mean that data-based research should be exempted from 
a Federal privacy law. The use of private commercial data for socially 
beneficial research should remain subject to strict standards for 
privacy, security, scientific validity, and ethical integrity.\41\ 
However, we recommend that legal frameworks contain flexible provisions 
for research, such as enforceable voluntary compliance with Federal 
Common Rule for human subject research; carefully tailored exceptions 
to the right of deletion for less readily identifiable information; or 
the creation of independent ethical review boards to oversee and 
approve beneficial research using personal information.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \41\ In the words of danah boyd and Kate Crawford, ``It may be 
unreasonable to ask researchers to obtain consent from every person who 
posts a tweet, but it is problematic for researchers to justify their 
actions as ethical simply because the data are accessible. Future of 
Privacy Forum, Conference Proceedings: Beyond IRBS: Designing Ethical 
Review Processes for Big Data Research (Dec. 20, 2016), page 4, https:/
/fpf.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/Beyond-IRBs-Conference-
Proceedings_12-20-16.pdf, citing danah boyd & Kate Crawford, Critical 
Questions for Big Data, 15(5) INFO. COMM. & SOC. 662 (2012).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    This balance between facilitating data research and evidence-based 
decision-making while maintaining privacy and ethical safeguards aligns 
with the 2017 report of the bipartisan Commission on Evidence-Based 
Policymaking and the 2018 Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking 
Act.\42\ The Commission noted that increasing access to confidential 
data need not necessarily increase privacy risk. Rather, ``steps that 
can be taken to improve data security and privacy protections beyond 
what exists today, while increasing the production of evidence.'' \43\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \42\ Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018, Pub. 
L. No. 115-435, 132 Stat. 5529 (2019).
    \43\ Report of the Commission on Evidence-Based Policymaking, 8 
(September 2017) https://www.cep.gov/report/cep-final-report.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    In short, companies that conduct research or partner with academic 
institutions must do so in a way that protects privacy, fairness, 
equity, and the integrity of the scientific process, and a Federal 
privacy law should encourage, rather than place undue burdens on, 
legitimate research when appropriate ethical reviews take place.
4. Internal Accountability and Oversight
    A Federal baseline privacy law should incentivize companies to 
employ meaningful internal accountability mechanisms, including privacy 
and security programs, which are managed by a privacy workforce. 
Ultimately, to implement privacy principles on the ground, including 
not just legal compliance but also privacy by design and privacy 
engineering, organizations will need to devote qualified and adequately 
trained employees. Indeed, over the past two decades, a privacy 
workforce has developed that combines the fields of law, public policy, 
technology, and business management. This workforce's professional 
association, the International Association of Privacy Professionals 
(IAPP), has doubled its membership in just the past 18 months.\44\ The 
IAPP provides training and professional certification, demonstrating 
the heightened demand among organizations for professionals who manage 
data privacy risks.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \44\ See IAPP-EY Annual Governance Report (2018), https://iapp.org/
media/pdf/resource_cen
ter/IAPP-EY-Gov_Report_2018-FINAL.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    In their book Privacy on the Ground, Kenneth Bamberger and Deirdre 
Mulligan stress ``the importance of the professionalization of privacy 
officers as a force for transmission of consumer expectation notions of 
privacy from diverse external stakeholders, and related `best 
practices,' between firms.'' \45\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \45\ Kenneth A. Bamberger & Deirdre K. Mulligan, Privacy on the 
Books and on the Ground, 63 Stan. L. Rev. 247, 252 (2010).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Accordingly, today, data privacy management should no longer be 
regarded as a role that employees in legal or HR departments fulfill as 
a small piece of their larger job. Rather, it must be a new 
professional role with standards, best practices, and norms, which are 
widely agreed upon not only nationally but also across geographical 
borders. Responsible practices for personal data management are not 
common knowledge or intuitive, any more than accounting rules. They 
require training, continuous education, and verifiable methods for 
identifying and recognizing acceptable norms. Put simply, the digital 
economy needs privacy professionals. Encouraging organizations to 
implement internal governance programs that employ such professionals 
will ensure higher professional standards and more responsible data 
use, regardless of the specific rules ultimately chosen for data 
collection, processing, or use.
    Federal legislation could provide a safe harbor or other incentives 
for development, documentation, and implementation of comprehensive 
data privacy programs; execution of ongoing, documented privacy and 
security risk assessments, including for risks arising from automated 
decision-making; and implementation of robust accountability programs 
with internal staffing and oversight by senior management. For example, 
GDPR requires companies to document their compliance measures,\46\ 
appoint Data Protection Officers,\47\ and create data protection impact 
assessments,\48\ among other requirements. Another way to increase 
internal expertise is to incentivize employee training through 
recognized programs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \46\ GDPR, Art. 24, 40.
    \47\ GDPR, Art. 37-39.
    \48\ GDPR, Art. 35.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    External certification processes act as objective validators to 
help companies, particularly those with limited resources, navigate 
complex legal requirements. Similarly, incentivizing companies or 
industry sectors to create ``red teams'' to proactively identify 
privacy abuses or to cooperate with watchdog entities or independent 
monitors to support additional oversight, such as through safe harbors 
or other methods, would create an additional layer of privacy 
safeguards.
5. Incentives for Technical Solutions
    Federal privacy legislation should promote the use of technical 
solutions, including privacy-enhancing technologies (PETS). The ``holy 
grail'' for data protection is utilizing technology that can achieve 
strong and provable privacy guarantees while still supporting 
beneficial uses. Legislation should create specific incentives for the 
use of existing privacy-enhancing technologies and for the development 
of new PETS. Following are ten PETS or technological trends that may 
become increasingly useful tools to manage privacy risks:
Advances in Cryptography
  a.  Zero Knowledge Proofs--Zero knowledge proof (ZKPs) are 
        cryptographic methods by which one party can prove to another 
        party that they know something to be true without conveying any 
        additional information (like how or why the mathematical 
        statement is true). ZKPs can be used in identity verification 
        contexts, e.g., to prove that someone is over a certain age 
        without revealing their exact date of birth. ZKPs help with 
        data minimization and data protection and promote privacy by 
        design and default.

  b.  Homomorphic Encryption--Homomorphic encryption is a process that 
        enables privacy-preserving data analysis by allowing some types 
        of analytical functions and computations to be performed on 
        encrypted data without first needing to decrypt the data.\49\ 
        It is especially useful in applications that retain encrypted 
        data in cloud storage for central access.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \49\ See David Wu, University of Virginia Computer Science 
Department, available at https://www.cs.virginia.edu/dwu4/fhe-
project.html.

  c.  Secure Multi-Party Computation--Secure multi-party computation 
        (SMPC) is a distributed computing system or technique that 
        provides the ability to compute values of interest from 
        multiple encrypted data sources without any party having to 
        reveal their private data to the others. A common example is 
        secret sharing, whereby data from each party is divided and 
        distributed as random, encrypted ``shares'' among the parties, 
        and when ultimately combined can provide the desired 
        statistical result.\50\ If any one share is compromised, the 
        remaining data is still safe. SMPC holds particular promise for 
        sharing or managing access to sensitive data such as health 
        records.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \50\ See Christopher Sadler, Protecting Privacy with Secure Multi-
Party Computation, New America (Jan. 11, 2018), https://
www.newamerica.org/oti/blog/protecting-privacy-secure-multi-party-
computation/.

  d.  Differential Privacy--Differential privacy (DP) is a rigorous 
        mathematical definition of privacy that quantifies the risk 
        that an individual is included in a data set. It leverages 
        anonymization techniques that involves the addition of 
        statistical ``noise'' to data sets before calculations are 
        computed and results released. DP can be global or local.\51\ 
        Global DP is server-side anonymization or deidentification 
        (where trust resides in the service provider); local DP is 
        applied on the client or user's device. There are now 
        differentially private versions of algorithms in machine 
        learning, game theory and economic mechanism design, 
        statistical estimation, and streaming. Differential privacy 
        works better on larger databases because as the number of 
        individuals in a database grows, the effect of any single 
        individual on a given aggregate statistic diminishes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \51\ Evaluation of Privacy-Preserving Technologies for Machine 
Learning, Outlier Ventures Research (Nov. 2018), https://
outlierventures.io/research/evaluation-of-privacy-preserving-
technologies-for-machine-learning/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Localization of Processing
  e.  Edge computing and Local Processing--For devices where speed is 
        of the essence or connectivity is not constant, applications, 
        data, and services are increasingly run away from centralized 
        nodes at the end points of a network. Such local processing 
        helps with data minimization by reducing the amount of data 
        that must be collected (accessible) by the service provider, or 
        retained on a centralized service or in cloud storage.

  f.  Device-Level Machine Learning--New machine learning focused 
        semiconductor components and algorithms--along with the speedy, 
        low-cost local storage and local processing capabilities of 
        edge computing--are allowing tasks that use to require the 
        computing horsepower of the cloud to be done in a more refined 
        and more focused way on edge devices.

  g.  Identity Management--Many identity management solutions under 
        consideration or development leverage a variety of platforms, 
        including distributed ledger technology (described above), and 
        local processing, that capitalize on device-level machine 
        learning to provide the ability for individuals to verify and 
        certify their identify. This enables people without Internet 
        access beyond smartphones or other simple devices to form 
        secure connections, exchange identity-related credentials (such 
        as transcripts or voting records) without going through a 
        centralized intermediary. Verified personal data can be 
        accessed from the user's device and shared via secure, 
        encrypted channels to third parties, with data limited to the 
        basic facts necessary for the relying party (e.g., that the 
        individual is over 21, or does in fact qualify for a specific 
        government service) on an as-needed basis. Depending on the 
        implementation and standards, identity management can create 
        privacy risks or can be deployed to support data minimization 
        and privacy by design and default.
Advances in Artificial Intelligence (AI) & Machine Learning (ML)
  h.  ``Small Data''--Small data AI and machine learning systems use 
        significantly less, or even no real data, via techniques such 
        as data augmentation (manipulating existing data sets), 
        transfer learning (importing learnings from a preexisting 
        model), synthetic data sets (see below), and others.\52\ With 
        small data techniques, the future forms of AI might be able to 
        operate without needing the tremendous amounts of training data 
        currently required for many applications.\53\ This capability 
        can greatly reduce the complexity and privacy risks associated 
        with AI and ML systems.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \52\ Harsha Angeri, Small Data & Deep Learning (AI): A Data 
Reduction Framework, Medium (Apr. 1, 2018), https://medium.com/
datadriveninvestor/small-data-deep-learning-ai-a-data-reduction-
framework-9772c7273992.
    \53\ H. James Wilson, Paul R. Daugherty, Chase Davenport, The 
Future of AI Will Be About Less Data, Not More, Harvard Business Review 
(Jan. 14, 2019), https://hbr.org/2019/01/the-future-of-ai-will-be-
about-less-data-not-more.

  i.  Synthetic Data Sets--Synthetic data sets are sets of artificial 
        data created to replicate the patterns and analytic potential 
        of real data about real individuals or events by replicating 
        the important statistical properties of real data.\54\ They can 
        be created at a vast scale and reduce the need for large 
        training or test data sets, particularly for AI and ML 
        applications, and thus support reduced data sharing or 
        secondary use concerns.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \54\ Applied AI, Synthetic Data: An Introduction & 10 Tools, (June 
2018 update), https://blog.appliedai.com/synthetic-data/.

  j.  Generative Adversarial Networks--Generative Adversarial Networks 
        (GANs) are a type of artificial intelligence, where algorithms 
        are created in pairs (one to ``learn,'' and the other to 
        ``judge''). Used in unsupervised machine learning, two neural 
        networks contest with each other in a framework to produce 
        better and better simulations of real data (creating faces of 
        people, or handwriting). One valuable use: generating synthetic 
        data sets.\55\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \55\ Dan Yin and Qing Yang, GANs Based Density Distribution 
Privacy-Preservation on Mobility Data, Security and Communication 
Networks, vol. 2018, Article ID 9203076, (Dec. 2, 2018), https://
doi.org/10.1155/2018/9203076.

    These tools and resources can potentially help mitigate data 
protection concerns posed by future technologies. Federal legislation 
could incentivize the growth and development of new PETS. The market 
for compliance tools for privacy and security professionals also 
continues to accelerate. Services that discover, map, and categorize 
data for organizations, wizards that help manage and complete privacy 
impact assessments, programs that handle data subject access requests 
and consent management, and deidentification services are already 
supporting privacy and security professionals at leading organizations 
as well as attracting investor interest.\56\ Data protection resources 
entering the marketing are increasingly central to building systems 
that allow professionals to manage the challenges that accompany the 
expanded data collection and the multiplying uses that shape modern 
business practices.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \56\ IAPP Privacy Tech Vendor Report (2018), https://iapp.org/
resources/article/2018-privacy-tech-vendor-report/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
6. Machine Learning
    A Federal privacy law should also promote beneficial uses of 
artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning. Many device 
manufacturers are making strides to minimize data collection by 
conducting data processing on-device (locally) rather than sending data 
back to a remote server. However, AI and machine learning technologies 
typically require large and representative data sets to power new 
models, to ensure accuracy, and to avoid bias. A U.S. framework would 
be wise to ensure that uses of data for machine learning are supported 
when conducted responsibly. To assess such responsible uses, we again 
recommend the development of a serious ethics review process. The 
academic IRB is well established as a necessary way for federally 
funded human subject research to be vetted.\57\ Counterparts for 
corporate data will be important, if structured to provide expertise, 
confidentiality, independance, transparency of process, speed, and 
expertise.\58\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \57\ Protection of Human Subjects, 45 C.F.R. Sec. Sec. 46.103, 
46.108 (2012).
    \58\ See Future of Privacy Forum, Conference Proceedings: Beyond 
IRBS: Designing Ethical Review Processes for Big Data Research (Dec. 
20, 2016), https://fpf.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/Beyond-IRBs-
Conference-Proceedings_12-20-16.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
7. Interaction with Existing Legal Frameworks
    A Federal baseline privacy law should take into consideration 
existing legal frameworks, by preempting certain state laws where they 
create conflicting or inconsistent requirements, and superseding or 
filling gaps between existing Federal sectoral laws. While recognizing 
the United States' unique global privacy leadership, a Federal privacy 
law should also address issues of interoperability with GDPR and other 
global legal regimes. At a minimum, it is important for the U.S. to 
protect cross-border data flows by not creating obligations that 
directly conflict with other existing international frameworks.
A. Interaction with State Laws
    The drafting of a Federal privacy law in the United States will 
necessarily impact the range of state and local privacy laws that have 
been passed in recent decades or are currently being drafted. The 
question of preemption is at the forefront of many conversations 
regarding a Federal privacy bill. Stakeholders from government, 
industry, civil society, and academia have expressed strong and 
sometimes conflicting views. At a minimum, we should seek to avoid a 
framework where website operators are expected to comply with multiple 
inconsistent state mandates on the many day-to-day issues at the core 
of the digital economy, ranging from signing users up for e-mail lists, 
implementing website analytics, or conducting e-commerce. These 
concerns can reasonably be avoided with carefully crafted Federal 
preemption, so long as the law also ensures a strong level of uniform 
privacy protections, certainly meeting and exceeding the core 
protections of the California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA).
    It is important to recognize that lawmakers' options are not 
binary. The choice is not between a preemptive Federal law and a non-
preemptive Federal law. Rather, lawmakers must grapple with a range of 
state authorities and choose which to preempt and which to 
preserve.\59\ I provide further context below. My core recommendations 
are that Congress: (1) preserve state Unfair and Deceptive Acts and 
Practices (UDAP) laws, which regulate a wide range of commercial 
conduct, from fair pricing to honest advertising, when they do not 
specifically target privacy or security requirements; (2) preempt 
generally applicable consumer privacy laws, like the California 
Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA); and (3) be thoughtful about which state 
sectoral privacy laws to preempt or preserve.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \59\ Peter Swire, U.S. Federal privacy preemption part 1: History 
of Federal preemption of stricter state laws (Jan 9, 2019), IAPP 
Privacy Tracker, https://iapp.org/news/a/us-federal-privacy-preemption-
part-1-history-of-federal-preemption-of-stricter-state-laws/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    For example, to the extent that a Federal law contains provisions 
that conflict with state common law or statutes, the latter will be 
preempted by default.\60\ Congress may, to the extent it wishes, take 
further steps to prevent states or local governments from drafting 
further new, different, or more protective laws, through express or 
implied ``field preemption.'' Within this range, there is great 
flexibility in the extent to which a Federal law can have preemptive 
effect.\61\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \60\ Supremacy Clause, U.S. CONST. art. VI, cl. 2.
    \61\ See generally, Paul M. Schwartz, Preemption and Privacy, 118 
Yale L.J. 902 (2008), available at https://
scholarship.law.berkeley.edu/cgi/
viewcontent.cgi?article=1071&context=facpubs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    As this Committee considers the appropriate balance of Federal and 
state intervention in the field of information privacy, it should 
carefully consider how a Federal privacy law will impact certain key 
aspects of current state regulation:

   State UDAP Laws. Every state has broadly applicable Unfair 
        and Deceptive Acts and Practices (UDAP) laws that prohibit 
        deceptive commercial practices or unfair or unconscionable 
        business practices.\62\ State enforcement authorities have 
        increasingly applied UDAP laws to data-driven business 
        practices such as mobile apps and platform providers.\63\ In 
        general, states should maintain the freedom to enforce broadly 
        applicable commercial fairness principles in a technology-
        neutral manner, to the extent that they do not specifically 
        regulate the collection and processing of personal information 
        addressed in the Federal law.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \62\ National Consumer Law Center, Consumer Protection in the 
States: A 50-State Evaluation of Unfair and Deceptive Practices Laws, 
(Mar. 2018), http://www.nclc.org/images/pdf/udap/udap-report.pdf.
    \63\ See e.g. Federal Trade Commission, Privacy & Data Security 
Update: 2017, https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/documents/reports/
privacy-data-security-update-2017-overview-commissions-enforcement-
policy-initiatives-consumer/privacy_and_data_security_update_2017.pdf. 
(As one of the examples of state enforcement actions, the FTC and 32 
State Attorneys General alleged that Lenovo engaged in an unfair and 
deceptive practice by selling consumer laptops with a preinstalled 
software program that accessed consumer's sensitive personal 
information transmitted over the Internet without the consumer's 
knowledge or consent.)

   State Constitutions. Eleven states have enumerated 
        constitutional rights to privacy, most of which were created 
        through constitutional amendments in the last 50 years.\64\ In 
        addition to governing law enforcement access to information, 
        some states have chosen to express a free-standing fundamental 
        right to privacy.\65\ These amendments to state constitutions 
        reflect the states' explicit intention to extend--or clarify--
        the fundamental rights of their own residents beyond the 
        existing status quo of Federal legal protections.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \64\ See National Conference of State Legislatures, Privacy 
Protections in State Constitutions (Nov. 7, 2018), http://www.ncsl.org/
research/telecommunications-and-information-technology/privacy-
protections-in-state-constitutions.aspx.; Gerald B. Cope, Jr., Toward a 
Right of Privacy as a Matter of State Constitutional Law, 5 Fla. St. U. 
L. Rev. 631, 690-710 (2014).
    \65\ See e.g. Cal. Const., art. I, Sec. 1; Haw. Const., art. I, 
Sec. Sec. 6-7; Alaska Const., art. I, Sec. 22.

   State Sector-Specific Laws. Comprehensive state efforts to 
        regulate consumer privacy and security, such as generally 
        applicable data breach laws or the recent California Consumer 
        Privacy Act, are likely to be partially or fully preempted by a 
        Federal law that meaningfully addresses the same issues and 
        creates similar substantive legal protections. However, a 
        Federal law should also carefully anticipate its effect on 
        sectoral state efforts, such as those regulating 
        biometrics,\66\ drones/UAV,\67\ or employer or school ability 
        to ask for social media credentials.\68\ For example, in the 
        field of student privacy, more than 120 state laws have passed 
        since 2013 regulating local and state education agencies and 
        education technology companies,\69\ and replacing those laws 
        with a general consumer privacy law could eliminate important 
        nuances that those laws incorporated; for example, a consumer 
        privacy law would likely allow for users to delete their data, 
        but, in the education context, students obviously should not 
        have the ability to delete a homework assignment or test 
        scores. Further complicating these matters, states retain a 
        constitutional right to regulate the core behavior of their own 
        governmental entities, including the regulation of school 
        districts.\70\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \66\ Biometric Information Privacy Act (BIPA), 740 ILCS/14 (2008).
    \67\ National Council of State Legislatures, Current Unmanned 
Aircraft State Law Landscape (Sept. 10, 2018). http://www.ncsl.org/
research/transportation/current-unmanned-aircraft-state-law-
landscape.aspx.
    \68\ National Council of State Legislatures, State Social Media 
Privacy Laws (Nov. 6, 2018). http://www.ncsl.org/research/
telecommunications-and-information-technology/state-laws-prohibiting-
access-to-social-media-usernames-and-passwords.aspx.
    \69\ State Student Privacy Laws, FERPA/Sherpa (April 23, 2019), 
https://ferpasherpa.org/state-laws.
    \70\ See U.S. CONST. art. X; Sonja Ralston Elder, Enforcing Public 
Educational Rights Via a Private Right of Action, 1 Duke Forum For L. & 
Soc. Change 137, 154 (2009).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
B. Interaction with Federal Sectoral Laws
    In some cases, it may be appropriate for a baseline, comprehensive 
Federal privacy law to supersede and replace existing sectoral Federal 
laws where a consistent baseline set of obligations would be 
beneficial. In other cases, the wide range of existing sectoral laws, 
including privacy laws and anti-discrimination laws, may be well suited 
to address concerns around automated decision-making or unfair uses of 
data.
C. Interaction with Global Privacy Frameworks
    The U.S. has an opportunity to demonstrate leadership, protect 
consumers, and facilitate commerce by crafting a Federal privacy law 
that ensures interoperability with international data protection laws. 
Just as the U.S. is currently confronting challenges posed by an 
assortment of privacy-focused state laws, disparate privacy regimes 
with varying degrees of privacy protections and controls are 
proliferating internationally. These laws and the corresponding 
multiplicity of compliance obligations adversely affect cross-border 
data flows and the multinational businesses that rely on such flows to 
remain competitive.
    Legislation should consider and address, as much as possible, 
interoperability with other nations' privacy frameworks.\71\ For 
example, legislation should promote interoperability with the most 
well-known example of a comprehensive privacy law, GDPR, which provides 
an extensive framework for the collection and use of personal data. The 
basic principles of GDPR should provide a reference for policymakers 
during the legislative process, with an understanding that the U.S. 
approach to privacy and other constitutional values may diverge in many 
areas, such as breadth of data subject rights, recognition of First 
Amendment rights, and the need for minimization requirements that may 
impact data use for AI and machine learning purposes. Also important 
for comparison are the OECD privacy guidelines and the APEC CBPS, 
particularly since the proposed United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement 
(USMCA), which Congress is reviewing as it considers ratification, 
recognizes the CBPR system as a valid data privacy compliance mechanism 
for data-transfers between the countries.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \71\ Per a McKinsey report, ``Cross-border data flows are the 
hallmarks of 21st-century globalization. Not only do they transmit 
valuable streams of information and ideas in their own right, but they 
also enable other flows of goods, services, finance, and people.'' 
McKinsey Global Institute, Digital Globalization: The New Era of Global 
Flows, (March 2016) at 30, https://www.mckinsey.com//media/McKinsey/
Business%20Functions/McKinsey%20Digital/Our%20
Insights/
Digital%20globalization%20The%20new%20era%20of%20global%20flows/MGI-
Digital-globalization-Full-report.ashx.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    A Federal baseline privacy law should also promote cross-border 
data flows by avoiding the creation of obligations that directly 
conflict with other international laws. For example, an emergence of 
recent data localization laws have expressly prohibited data transfers 
or mandated highly-restrictive regulatory environments, resulting in 
inefficient and burdensome requirements for activities including: data 
storage, management, processing, and analytics. Countries that erect 
these barriers to data flows often cite concerns about cybersecurity, 
national security, and privacy.\72\ Localization detrimentally impacts 
businesses,\73\ consumers who benefit from free flows of data, and 
potentially data security. Thoughtful data governance and oversight 
policies with data subject rights and other protections can address 
data protection issues without resorting to a regulatory environment 
that employs localization as a solution.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \72\ The U.S. International Trade Commission and Department of 
Commerce have considered these concerns in a series of convenings and 
reports over the past several years. See e.g., U.S. Dept. of Commerce, 
Measuring the Value of Cross-Border Data, (Sept. 30, 2016), https://www
.commerce.gov/news/fact-sheets/2016/09/measuring-value-cross-border-
data-flows; U.S. Intl. Trade Comm'n, Global Digital Trade 1: Market 
Opportunities and Key Foreign Trade Restrictions, (Aug. 2017), https://
www.usitc.gov/publications/332/pub4716_0.pdf.
    \73\ For example, a U.S. International Trade Commission report 
notes that there are cost, speed, and security advantages to cloud-
based technologies. U.S. Intl. Trade Comm'n, Global Digital Trade 1: 
Market Opportunities and Key Foreign Trade Restrictions, (Aug. 2017) at 
20, https://www.usitc.gov/publications/332/pub4716_0.pdf. A 2016 
McKinsey report found a 10.1 percent rise in GDP over 10 years is 
attributable to cross-border flows. McKinsey Global Institute, Digital 
Globalization: The New Era of Global Flows, (Mar. 2016) at 30, https://
www.mckinsey.com//media/McKinsey/Business%20Functions/
McKinsey%20Digital/Our%20Insights/Digital%20
globalization%20The%20new%20era%20of%20global%20flows/MGI-Digital-
globalization-Full-report.ashx.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
8. Rulemaking, Civil Penalties, and Enforcement
    No matter how well crafted, a privacy law will almost certainly 
require a well-resourced administrative mechanism to clarify certain 
terms and standards. In Europe, the GDPR contemplates that guidance 
from Data Protection Authorities will clarify key concepts and 
requirements. In California, the CCPA tasks the state attorney general 
with promulgating rules on complicated aspects of the statute. Under 
Federal law, Congress provided for the FTC to issue regulations under 
the COPPA statute that have helped define key provisions and enable the 
law's safe-harbor program for the collection and use of children's 
data.
    A comprehensive Federal privacy law is no different. I urge the 
Committee to carefully consider what aspects of a Federal law might 
benefit from regulatory clarity or guidance over time. And I urge 
legislative drafters to empower the FTC to provide such clarity, with 
specific parameters and considerations to take into account and subject 
to reasonable guardrails on the agency's authority. The Commission and 
other stakeholders have agreed, and noted that additional investigatory 
resources would be welcome.\74\ The Commission receives many consumer 
complaints and would benefit from the ability to hire more technology 
and legal experts. Enhanced resources, and the deeper understanding of 
technology and business practices they bring to the Commission, can 
lead to fairer outcomes for both individuals and companies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \74\ FTC Staff, FTC Staff Comment to the NTIA: Developing the 
Administration's Approach to Consumer Privacy, Docket No. 180821780-
8780-01 (November 9, 2019) https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/documents/
advocacy_documents/ftc-staff-comment-ntia-developing-administrations-
approach-consumer-privacy/p195400_ftc_comment_to_ntia_112018.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The authority to bring civil penalties is another key aspect of the 
FTC's current oversight of global technology firms. But today, the FTC 
can only fully exercise this oversight regarding companies with whom 
the Commission has entered into settlement agreements. Civil penalty 
authority in the first instance would enable to FTC to bring its 
oversight to bear on all companies that handle personal data, 
protecting individuals and consumers and leveling the playing field.
    It is also vital that technical assistance be provided if a new law 
is passed, particularly for small businesses. The FTC can help fulfill 
this role. A potential model for this is the U.S. Department of 
Education's Privacy Technical Assistance Center (PTAC), which has 
played a vital role in providing guidance, technical assistance, and 
best practices to states, districts, companies, and privacy 
advocates.\75\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \75\ U.S. Department of Education, Privacy Technical Assistance 
Center, https://studentpri
vacy.ed.gov.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Finally, there has also been a growing recognition of the important 
role of state attorneys general in the creation and protection of 
evolving privacy norms.\76\ State attorneys general have brought 
enforcement actions that meaningfully push forward legal protections in 
many areas.\77\ As officials with a broad scope of authority and the 
freedom to respond to rapidly evolving privacy challenges, they should 
remain key partners in the enforcement of a baseline Federal 
information privacy law.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \76\ Danielle Keats Citron, The Privacy Policymaking of State 
Attorneys General, 92 Notre Dame L. Rev. 747, 785-91 (2016), http://
ndlawreview.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/NDL205.pdf.
    \77\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Conclusion
    This is a critical juncture for U.S. policymaking. Privacy 
regulation is charging ahead in the EU and in the states. Now is the 
time for the United States as a nation to reassert its policy 
leadership, which stretches from Warren and Brandeis' 1890 treatise on 
The Right to Privacy,\78\ through William Prosser's explication of the 
privacy torts in 1960,\79\ to the Department of Health, Education, and 
Welfare's report first outlining the fair information practices in 
1972,\80\ which are the cornerstone for every data protection framework 
from OECD to GDPR.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \78\ Samuel D. Warren & Louis D. Brandeis, The Right to Privacy, 4 
Harvard L. Rev. 193 (1890), https://www.cs.cornell.edu/shmat/courses/
cs5436/warren-brandeis.pdf.
    \79\ William L. Prosser, Privacy, 48 Calif. L. Rev. 383 (1960), 
https://doi.org/10.15779/Z383J3C.
    \80\ Records, Computer, and the Rights of Citizens: Report of the 
Secretary's Advisory Committee on Automated Personal Data Systems, U.S. 
Dept. of Health & Human Services (1973), https://aspe.hhs.gov/report/
records-computers-and-rights-citizens.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Federal legislation should empower the FTC to rulemake and enforce 
and allow state AGs to retain enforcement powers. It should recognize 
broad spectrum of identifiability in definition of PII. It should 
provide heightened protection for sensitive data or contexts. It should 
not unduly restrict socially beneficial research find a way to enable 
crucial data-driven research. It should incentivize and recognize the 
privacy profession and PETs.
    In my view, the best approach would be for Congress to draft and 
pass a baseline, non-sectoral Federal information privacy law. Although 
I have flagged specific considerations related to such a law's content 
and its interaction with existing legal frameworks, I overall believe 
that a strong Federal law remains the best approach to guaranteeing 
clear, consistent, and meaningful privacy and security protections in 
the United States.
APPENDED:
    A. Future of Privacy Forum, Infographic, Personal Data and the 
Organization: Stewardship and Strategy
    B. Future of Privacy Forum, Infographic, A VIsual Guide to 
Practical De-Identification
    C. Future of Privacy Forum Infographic, Financial Data 
Localization: Conflicts and Consequences
    D. Future of Privacy Forum, Draft Legislative Language: ``Covered 
Data''
    E. Future of Privacy Forum, Unfairness by Algorithm: Distilling the 
Harms of Automated Decision-making (December 2017)
    F. Future of Privacy Forum & Anti-Defamation League, Big Data: A 
Tool for Fighting Discrimination and Empowering Groups

    The Chairman. And thank you very much, sir.
    Mr. Steyer.

   STATEMENT OF JAMES P. STEYER, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER AND 
                  FOUNDER, COMMON SENSE MEDIA

    Mr. Steyer. Thank you, Chairman Wicker, Ranking Member 
Cantwell, and the distinguished members of this Committee. It 
is great to be here.
    I am Jim Steyer. I am the Founder and CEO of Common Sense 
Media. We are the leading kids' media and tech group in the 
United States. We launched about 15 years ago. Just for a 
little background, we have 110 million unique users every year 
on our consumer platform. We created an award-winning digital 
citizenship curriculum that is in most of the schools in your 
guys' states. And we have 75,000 member schools across the 
world, most of which are in the U.S., teaching kids about not 
just their privacy rights but the safe, responsible use of 
tech.
    I am also a prof at Stanford where I have taught 
constitutional law for the last 30 years.
    The one thing I would sort of say in general today is that 
as someone who has been a child advocate for 30 years--I am a 
father of four. I have got a 15-year-old. That is our youngest 
now. I think this is a major moment in time on these issues. It 
has been literally almost 20 years since the U.S. Congress did 
anything meaningful in the area of privacy. And right now, even 
though there are tens of millions of American families who are 
worried about privacy issues for themselves, but most of all 
for their children, there is only one state, the state that I 
live in, California, that has a comprehensive privacy law. And 
in fact, it was us at Common Sense Media who spearheaded that 
law last year, the CCPA that has been referred to.
    I just think it is this great moment in time where this 
body has to act. I always say when I get up in front of parents 
that 20 years ago Mark Zuckerberg was barely out of diapers. 
Google was a concept in sort of obscure math ideas. And this 
device did not even exist. But it is all here now and our kids 
are living on it and we are all living on it. And so during 
this time of extraordinary growth in the tech economy, we have 
got to come up with a comprehensive, smart, common sense 
privacy law that is going to protect all of us, all of our 
families, and most of all, our kids.
    Right now, there essentially are no guardrails when it 
comes to privacy federally. We have one law, the California law 
that we passed last year. It goes into effect in January. And 
then we have GDPR, which Ms. Dixon referred to. So it is high 
time that Congress and this august body stepped up to the plate 
and protected the fundamental privacy rights of every citizen 
in this country.
    The one thing that we saw very much in California when we 
passed the law is that it is a totally bipartisan issue. This 
is something that everybody ought to be able to agree on 
because we all are both the beneficiaries of the extraordinary 
aspects of the tech industry, but we are also the victims when 
privacy rights are violated, whether it is individually or 
whether it involves interference with our electoral process. So 
overwhelming majorities of Americans agree with us. The 
California law passed unanimously. And so I would just urge you 
to really work, as you do, as a bipartisan group to support 
comprehensive privacy laws now.
    Four big points that I would say to you.
    One, the California law is a floor, not a ceiling. Anything 
that should come out of this committee and this Senate should 
be stronger than the California law. I know. We negotiated it. 
We gave up a number of rights in order to get it passed. We 
worked with companies like Microsoft, Apple, and SalesForce to 
get it done. But this body should be looking at California as 
an absolute floor rather than as a ceiling.
    The second thing I would say is that kids and teens are the 
most vulnerable. They deserve special protection. As our good 
friend, Senator Markey, knows as well as anyone, kids need 
extremely important and unique protections. So as you consider 
the law, we hope you will put kids first and include teens in 
this law as well.
    Third, there needs to be ongoing public education, a public 
awareness campaign. The average American, I would argue the 
average Senator, is not a computer wizard or tech wizard. So 
once we have a law, we need to explain it to the public how to 
use it. That is a big thing we are going to start doing in 
California in 2020. But I would urge you to think about that, 
how do you make it simple, easy, and easily understandable for 
a luddite like me and some of you.
    And last but not least, I do want to raise the other thing. 
In the wake of the live streaming of mass shootings on Facebook 
a few weeks ago, and the inability of YouTube and other 
platforms to pull some of that extraordinarily inappropriate 
content for anyone, let alone children, down, we would urge you 
to think about it separately, the concept of section 230 in the 
safe harbor provision and what kind of regulations there ought 
to be, for kids in particular, of inappropriate content on the 
Web.
    At the end of the day, I think the bottom line is clear. 
This is your folks' moment to do something great for everybody 
in America on a bipartisan basis, and we are happy to help.
    Thank you very much for having me.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Steyer follows:]

  Prepared Statement of James P. Steyer, Chief Executive Officer and 
                      Founder, Common Sense Media
    Good morning Chairman Wicker, Ranking Member Cantwell, and 
distinguished Committee Members. Thank you for the opportunity to 
appear before you, and for your willingness to engage with the 
complicated--but critically important--issue of consumer privacy.
    My name is James P. Steyer and I am the founder and CEO of Common 
Sense Media. Common Sense is America's leading organization dedicated 
to helping kids and families thrive in a rapidly changing digital 
world. We help parents, teachers, and policymakers by providing 
unbiased information, trusted advice, and innovative tools to help them 
harness the power of media and technology as a positive force in all 
kids' lives. Since launching 15 years ago, Common Sense has helped 
millions of families and kids think critically and make smart, 
responsible choices about the media they create and consume. Common 
Sense has over 108 million users and our award winning Digital 
Citizenship Curriculum is the most comprehensive K-12 offering of its 
kind in the education field; we have over 700,000 registered educators 
using our resources in over half of U.S. schools. Common Sense was a 
sponsor of California's precedent-setting consumer privacy law, the 
California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA). We have also sponsored and 
supported privacy laws across the country and at the Federal level, 
including California's landmark Student Online Privacy Information 
Protection Act (SOPIPA) and the recently introduced bipartisan COPPA 
2.0.
Children And Teens Are Particularly Vulnerable
    When we started Common Sense a decade and a half ago, privacy was 
not a major concern for kids and families. But it has grown 
significantly as an issue over the past several years, to the point 
where we find ourselves today. Privacy concerns are particularly acute 
for kids: Ninety-eight percent of children under 8 in America have 
access to a mobile device at home.\1\ American teens consume an average 
of 9 hours a day of media,\2\ and half of teens report feeling addicted 
to their devices. Children today face surveillance unlike any other 
generation--their every movement online and off can be tracked by 
potentially dozens of different companies and organizations. Further, 
kids are prone to sharing and impulsive behavior, are more susceptible 
to advertising, and are less able to understand what may happen to 
their personal information.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ Common Sense: Technology Addiction: Concern, Controversy, and 
Finding Balance (2016)
    \2\ Ibid
    \3\ Children, Adolescents, and Advertising (2006)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Unfortunately, too many companies are not protecting children's and 
their families' privacy. A recent analysis found that more than half of 
6,000 free children's apps may serve kids ads that violate COPPA.\4\ 60 
percent of connected devices don't provide proper information on how 
they collect, use and disclose users' personal information.\5\ Millions 
of kids and parents have had sensitive information--including family 
chats--exposed by connected toys.\6\ Data brokers are selling profiles 
of children as young as two (and identity theft can occur before a 
child's first birthday).\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \4\ Reyes et. al, ``Won't Somebody Think of the Children?'' 
Examining COPPA Compliance at Scale. Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing 
Technologies (2018)
    \5\ GPEN Privacy Sweep on Internet of Things (2016)
    \6\ Jensen, Data Breach Involving CloudPets ``Smart'' Toys Raises 
Internet-of-Things Security Concerns, Data Privacy + Security Insider 
(2017); and Real-World Reasons Parents Should Care About Kids and 
Online Privacy (2018)
    \7\ Ibid
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    A growing lack of privacy and distrust of the online and tech world 
impacts every family, and could significantly impact the personal 
development of young people. At Common Sense, we believe kids need the 
freedom to make mistakes, try new things, and find their voices without 
the looming threat of a permanent digital record that could be used 
against them.
    It is our goal to help our millions of American members improve the 
digital wellbeing of their families--and while in many instances that 
means teaching parents, teachers, and kids good digital citizenship 
practices and privacy skills, it also means ensuring there are baseline 
protections in place. Even savvy digital citizens are powerless if they 
do not know what companies are doing with their information, if they 
cannot access, delete, or move their information, or if they have no 
choices with respect to the use and disclosure of their information.
Families' Privacy Expectations And Desires
    What do families want in privacy protections? According to our 
research: More than 9 in 10 parents and teens think it's important that 
websites clearly label what data they collect and how it will be 
used.\8\ Those same numbers--more than 9 in 10--think it is important 
that sites ask permission before selling or sharing data.\9\ And almost 
9 in 10, or 88 percent, think it is important to control whether data 
is used to target ads across devices.\10\ Speaking of devices, 93 
percent of parents believe that with smart devices it is important to 
control what information is collected about them and to know when their 
voices are being recorded.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \8\ Privacy Matters: Protecting Digital Privacy for Parents and 
Kids (2018)
    \9\ Ibid
    \10\ Ibid
    \11\ Ibid
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    These views and data points informed the values--including consent, 
transparency, control, plus special protections for young people--that 
guided our approach to the privacy work we did in California.
The California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA)
    The CCPA is the first generally applicable consumer privacy law in 
America--not limited to financial or health information, or any 
specific entity--that recognizes that Americans have privacy rights in 
all of their information, no matter who holds it. Importantly, the 
California privacy law protects everyone, not just kids or students. 
This is born of our belief that, while children and teens need special 
safeguards, the best way to protect them is to have baseline 
protections for everyone: (1) so families are protected and (2) so 
businesses cannot pretend they are not dealing with kids.
    In California, a statewide ballot initiative focused on notice and 
saying no to sales of data was the catalyst that led to larger 
discussions to develop more comprehensive privacy legislation. At 
Common Sense, we worked hard to expand substantive rights under the 
law--including opt-in rights (which we achieved for minors under 16), 
and new access, deletion, and portability rights. The CCPA ultimately 
passed unanimously through both houses of the California legislature.
    The law goes into effect in 2020, and will allow California 
residents to access the personal information companies collect about 
them--as well as port their data to another platform, or demand the 
deletion of their data (with exceptions) if they wish. Californians 
will be empowered to tell companies to stop selling their personal 
information. And kids under 16 or their parents must actively consent 
before their data is ever sold. The Attorney General is charged with 
enforcing violations of the law--with a private right of action for 
certain data breaches--and the law applies equally to service 
providers, edge companies, and brick and mortar entities.
Any Federal Law Should Build Upon California
    Like the CCPA, any Federal law must go beyond ``consent'', and 
include rights to access, port, and delete information. It must enable 
consumers to say no to the sharing of their information, and it would 
be even better if the law required that consumers say yes before their 
information is sold or shared--families would be better served if the 
rule for all people, not just minors under 16, was that companies could 
not sell information without opt-in approval. Indeed, the California 
law is a huge step forward, but it is not perfect and it does not offer 
consumers all of the protections they deserve. As this committee 
considers bipartisan Federal legislation, additional protections 
families want and deserve include: the rights to limit companies' own 
use of consumer information; the ability for consumers to enforce their 
own rights in court; and the assurance that companies are building 
default privacy protections (privacy by design) and practicing data 
minimization. Certain practices should be off limits, and individuals, 
especially children, should not be able to consent to them (such as, 
for example, manipulative user designs that subvert user autonomy, or 
behaviorally targeted marketing to kids).
    Privacy protections must be strong across the board, but they must 
recognize the unique vulnerabilities of children and teenagers. The 
bipartisan COPPA 2.0 offers an excellent example of the protections 
young people need: in addition to putting families in the driver's seat 
regarding information collection, use, and disclosure, COPPA 2.0 
contains additional safeguards (and, for young children, flat 
prohibitions) around targeted and behavioral marketing; it would 
enhance the privacy and security of vulnerable connected devices 
families are bringing inside their homes; and it offers new resources 
and authority to the Federal Trade Commission to focus on examining the 
industry and enforcing these protections.
    Any law Congress passes should be at least as strong, if not 
stronger, than California's CCPA. The CCPA will go into effect next 
year, and it is clear from polling that vast majorities of Californians 
from all parties support it.\12\ What's more, it is also clear from 
other states that individuals and state legislators are not going to 
accept laws that are weak on privacy.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \12\ California Voters Overwhelmingly Support Stronger Consumer 
Privacy Protections (2019); and Privacy Matters: Protecting Digital 
Privacy for Parents and Kids (2018)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    And, as with past Federal privacy laws, national legislation should 
ensure that there are baseline protections in place, but provide room 
and space for states to continue to innovate. A weak preemptive law 
would be a travesty of justice and take away rights from millions of 
consumers, not just the eighth of the country that lives in California 
but the many individuals who live in other states with strong privacy 
laws such as Illinois, with its biometric law, or Vermont, with its 
data broker registry.
    States have always been the first line of defense to protect 
individual citizens from scams and unfair business practices, and state 
tort law has protected the privacy of homes and persons. State 
innovation in the privacy sphere has brought us data security rules, 
laws applying directly to ed tech vendors, laws protecting the privacy 
of our bodies, and laws shining light on data brokers. The speed of 
technology is lighting fast, and states are in a position to act nimbly 
and innovate, just like businesses. States are true laboratories of 
democracy, and in the past few decades they have been engaging on 
privacy and working with consumers and businesses to determine workable 
new protections and safeguards.
Any Law Must Be Coupled With Consumer Education
    It is critical that any new law be coupled with effective consumer 
education. From our research at Common Sense, we know that families 
crave better privacy protections. We also know that some are taking 
measures to try and protect themselves--for example, 86 percent of 
parents and 79 percent of teens have adjusted privacy settings on 
social media sites.\13\ But in many instances, families have the desire 
but lack the knowledge. In discussing connected devices with parents, 
we learned 71 percent would like to limit data collection, but a full 
third do not know how.\14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \13\ Privacy Matters: Protecting Digital Privacy for Parents and 
Kids (2018)
    \14\ Ibid
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    This is why it is important to have companies build products, 
platforms and services with the most protective privacy defaults 
possible. It is also why kids and adults need to know how to exercise 
their privacy rights. Education is imperative in this regard. As I 
mentioned, Common Sense is committed to giving parents and teachers the 
information they need to make informed choices about the apps they use 
with their children at home and the learning tools they use with 
students in the classroom. We provide expert advice articles and 
privacy evaluations for parents to learn more about how they can 
protect their kids' privacy and we empower schools and districts to 
thoroughly assess technology products used in K-12 classrooms. We 
collaborate with hundreds of school and district partners and provide 
assistance to software developers to make sure their privacy practices 
are transparent and comprehensive and created with kids' best interests 
in mind. We also provide a high-quality Digital Citizenship Curriculum 
for school communities that supports teachers with improved classroom 
tools, and prepares kids to take ownership of their digital lives.
    At present, across the country, opportunities to empower 
individuals to make real decisions or protect their privacy are few and 
far between. Companies offer a ``take it or leave it'' framework that, 
because of jobs, school requirements, or an interest in participating 
in democratic life, individuals feel forced to accept. We must ensure 
consumers have default protections in place, and we must also work to 
educate them about additional, or alternative, choices. Digital 
citizenship education should be a part of school curriculums, and 
requires more support and funding.
    What's more, privacy protections are just one piece of the puzzle. 
As young people live more and more of their lives online, they face an 
ever expanding array of opportunities and risks. In addition to 
protecting children and families' privacy, we must endeavor to provide 
all kids with access to high quality content, and protect them from 
being exposed to the worst of humanity with the click of a button, 
scroll of a feed, or failure to stop a new video from autoplaying. We 
must consider, as a country, whether laws like Section 230 are serving 
the best interest of our children, and what we can do to improve the 
entirety of their digital experience.
Conclusion
    Thank you again for your bipartisan efforts to address consumer 
privacy. It's critical that we teach individuals how to protect 
themselves, but the burden should not fall entirely on consumers, 
especially on kids and families. We have seen many businesses will not 
protect consumer privacy on their own. We need a strong Federal 
baseline privacy law, that offers everyone protections and recognizes 
the special vulnerabilities of children and teens.

    The Chairman. Thank you very much, Mr. Steyer.
    Ms. Guliani.

 STATEMENT OF NEEMA SINGH GULIANI, SENIOR LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL, 
 WASHINGTON LEGISLATIVE OFFICE, AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION

    Ms. Guliani. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today 
on behalf of the ACLU.
    We are all here because the current privacy regime is 
broken and it is failing consumers. Lack of privacy affects 
everyday life. It can increase unfair discrimination, 
exacerbate economic inequality, and even threaten physical 
safety.
    For example, studies have documented how some retailers 
charge customers different prices based on things like their 
Zip code or their browsing habits. In many cases, consumers are 
not even aware their information is being collected, much less 
how they can protect themselves against these types of uses.
    In another study, online mortgage lenders charge black and 
Latin borrowers more and higher rates for their loans, 
replicating the types of discrimination that Federal laws like 
the Equal Credit Opportunity Act were designed to prevent.
    The ACLU strongly supports Federal privacy legislation to 
address problems like these. There are many elements that such 
legislation should include, but I want to highlight four areas 
in particular that are of concern.
    The first is any Federal law should be a floor, not a 
ceiling. Some industry representatives have urged you to 
broadly preempt State laws as part of any Federal legislation. 
I want to be crystal clear here. This would be a bad deal for 
consumers. If Congress uses Federal privacy legislation as an 
opportunity to broadly preempt State laws, it will cause more 
harm than good.
    As an organization with affiliates in every state, the ACLU 
has been at the forefront of many efforts to pass strong State 
privacy laws. We know firsthand that in many cases it has been 
states, not Congress, that have led efforts to protect 
consumers. California was the first State in the Nation to 
require companies to notify customers of a data breach, and 
just last year it passed a broader consumer privacy bill that 
you all are familiar with.
    Illinois has set important limits on the commercial 
collection and storage of biometric information, and nearly all 
states regulate unfair and deceptive trade practices, 
complementing the FTC's authority in this area.
    These states have acted as laboratories. They have 
experimented and innovated with new ways to protect consumers. 
We should be wary of the Federal Government stepping in and 
with one stroke of a pen wiping out dozens of State laws 
already on the books and preventing future ones.
    Broad preemption, in fact, would represent a shift in the 
approach taken by many Federal laws. HIPAA allows states to 
enact more stringent privacy protections for health 
information, and Federal civil rights laws have historically 
allowed states to pass higher standards. This is one of the 
reasons we have State laws that protect against discrimination 
on the basis of sexual orientation, despite the gaps in Federal 
law.
    Federal legislation must certainly account for cases where 
it would be impossible to comply with both a State and Federal 
law. But that can be accomplished through a narrow and clear 
preemption provision that addresses conflicts and explicitly 
preserves the rights of states to pass stronger laws and to 
enforce those laws.
    Two, any privacy legislation should allow consumers to sue 
companies that violate their rights. The FTC undoubtedly needs 
more power and more resources. But even if its size were 
doubled or even tripled, there would be giant enforcement gaps. 
This is part of the reason that the California Attorney General 
recently supported legislation to strengthen California's law 
with a privacy right of action. In discussing the legislation, 
he said, quote, we need to have some help. He highlighted that 
individuals should be able to enforce their rights in cases 
where the government was not able to take action. Polling in 
California has found that 94 percent of consumers support being 
able to take a company to court if their privacy rights are 
violated.
    Three, legislation should protect against discrimination. 
There must be the resources and the technical expertise to 
enforce existing Federal laws that prohibit discrimination in 
the housing, credit, and employment context.
    In addition, however, Federal law must be strengthened to 
prohibit advertisers from offering different price, services, 
and opportunities to individuals based on protected 
characteristics like race and gender.
    And consumers must also have the tools to address 
algorithms or machine learning tools that disparately impact 
individuals on the basis of such protected characteristics.
    Finally, there should be guardrails on how data can be 
collected, stored, and used. For example, use of information 
should be limited to the purpose for which it was collected 
unless there is additional informed consent. And we should also 
prohibit so-called pay for privacy schemes that threaten to 
create privacy haves and have-nots and risk causing disastrous 
consequences for people who are already struggling financially.
    Without these protections a new Federal law risks being a 
step backward, not forward.
    I look forward to answering your questions.
    [The prepared statement of Ms. Guliani follows:]

Prepared Statement of Neema Singh Guliani, Senior Legislative Counsel, 
     Washington Legislative Office, American Civil Liberties Union
    Chairman Thune, Ranking Member Cantwell, and Members of the 
Committee,
    Thank you for the opportunity to testify on behalf of the American 
Civil Liberties Union (ACLU)\1\ and for holding this hearing on, 
``Consumer Perspectives: Policy Principles for a Federal Data Privacy 
Framework.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ For nearly 100 years, the ACLU has been our Nation's guardian 
of liberty, working in courts, legislatures, and communities to defend 
and preserve the individual rights and liberties that the Constitution 
and laws of the United States guarantee everyone in this country. With 
more than three million members, activists, and supporters, the ACLU is 
a nationwide organization that fights tirelessly in all 50 states, 
Puerto Rico and Washington, D.C., to preserve American democracy and an 
open government.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Privacy impacts virtually every facet of modern life. Personal 
information can be exploited to unfairly discriminate, exacerbate 
economic inequality, or undermine security. Unfortunately, our existing 
laws have not kept pace with technology, leaving consumers with little 
ability to control their own personal information or recourse in cases 
where their rights are violated. And, as numerous examples illustrate, 
consumers are paying the price. Studies have documented how several 
retailers charged consumers different prices by exploiting information 
related to their digital habits inferred from people's web-browsing 
history.\2\ Some online mortgage lenders have charged Latino and Black 
borrowers more for loans, potentially by determining loan rates based 
on machine learning and patterns in big data.\3\ And, sensitive data 
about the location and staffing of U.S. military bases abroad was 
reportedly revealed inadvertently by a fitness app that posted the 
location information of users online.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \2\ Aniko Hannak, et al., Measuring Price Discrimination and 
Steering on E-commerce Web Sites, PROCEEDINGS OF THE 2014 CONFERENCE ON 
INTERNET MEASUREMENT CONFERENCE, 2014, at 305-318, http://doi.acm.org/
10.1145/2663716.2663744.
    \3\ ROBERT BARTLETT, ADAIR MORSE, RICHARD STANTON & NANCY WALLACE, 
CONSUMER-LENDING DISCRIMINATION IN THE ERA OF FINTECH 4 (2018), http://
faculty
.haas.berkeley.edu/morse/research/papers/
discrim.pdf?_ga=2.121311752.1273672289.15563249
69-25127549.1556324969.
    \4\ Alex Hern, Fitness Tracking App Strava Gives Away Location of 
Secret U.S. Army Bases, THE GUARDIAN (Jan. 28, 2018), https://
www.theguardian.com/world/2018/jan/28/fitness-tracking-app-gives-away-
location-of-secret-us-army-bases.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The current privacy landscape is untenable for consumers. The ACLU 
supports strong baseline Federal legislation to protect consumer 
privacy. I would like to emphasize several issues that are of 
particular concern to the ACLU and our members. The ACLU strongly urges 
Congress to ensure that any Federal privacy legislation, at a minimum, 
(1) sets a floor, not a ceiling, for state level protections; (2) 
contains robust enforcement mechanisms, including a private right of 
action; (3) prevents data from being used to improperly discriminate on 
the basis of race, sexual orientation, or other protected 
characteristics; and (4) creates clear and strong ground rules for the 
use, collection, and retention of consumers' personal data, which does 
not rest solely on the flawed notice and consent model.
I. Federal legislation should not prevent states from putting in place 
        stronger consumer protections or taking enforcement action
    Any Federal privacy standards should be a floor--not a ceiling--for 
consumer protections. The ACLU strongly opposes legislation that would, 
as some industry groups have urged, preempt stronger state laws.\5\ 
Such an approach would put existing consumer protections, many of which 
are state-led, on the chopping block and prevent additional consumer 
privacy protections from ever seeing the light of day. We also oppose 
efforts to limit the ability of state Attorneys General or other 
regulators from suing, fining, or taking other actions against 
companies that violate their laws.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \5\ See U.S. Chamber of Commerce, U.S. Chamber Privacy Principles, 
(Sept. 6, 2018), available at https://www.uschamber.com/issue-brief/us-
chamber-privacy-principles; Internet Association, Privacy Principles, 
available at https://internetassociation.org/positions/privacy/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    There are multiple examples of states leading the charge to pass 
laws to protect consumer privacy from new and emerging threats. For 
example, California was the first state in the Nation to require that 
companies notify consumers \6\ of a data breach (all states have since 
followed suit),\7\ the first to mandate that companies disclose through 
a conspicuous privacy policy the types of information they collect and 
share with third parties,\8\ and among the first to recognize data 
privacy rights for children.\9\ The state's recently passed California 
Consumer Privacy Act of 2018, which goes into effect next year, is also 
the first in the Nation to apply consumer protections to a broad range 
of businesses, including provisions that limit the sale of personal 
information, give consumers the right to delete and obtain information 
about how their data is being used, and provide a narrow private right 
of action for some instances of data breach.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \6\ See California Civil Code s.1798.25-1798.29.
    \7\ See National Conference of State Legislatures, Security Breach 
Notification Laws, (Sept. 29, 2018), available at http://www.ncsl.org/
research/telecommunications-and-information-technology/security-breach-
notification-laws.aspx.
    \8\ See California Code, Business and Professions Code--BPC 
Sec. 22575.
    \9\ See California Code, Business and Professions Code--
BPCSec. 22582.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Similarly, Illinois has set important limits on the commercial 
collection and storage of biometric information, such as fingerprints 
and face prints.\10\ Idaho, West Virginia, Oklahoma, and other states 
have passed laws to protect student privacy.\11\ Nevada and Minnesota 
require Internet service providers to keep certain information about 
their customers private and to prevent disclosure of personally 
identifying information.\12\ Arkansas and Vermont have enacted 
legislation to prevent employers from requesting passwords to personal 
Internet accounts to get or keep a job. At least 34 states also require 
private or governmental entities to conduct data minimization and/or 
disposal of personal information,\13\ and 22 have laws implementing 
data security measures.\14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \10\ See Biometric Information Privacy Act, 740 ILCS 14/, http://
www.ilga.gov/legislation/ilcs/ilcs3.asp?ActID=3004&ChapterID=57.
    \11\ See Center for Democracy and Technology, State Student Privacy 
Law Compendium (Oct. 2016), available at https://cdt.org/files/2016/10/
CDT-Stu-Priv-Compendium-FNL.pdf.
    \12\ See National Conference of State Legislatures, Privacy 
Legislation Related to Internet Service Providers-2018 (Oct. 15, 2018), 
available at http://www.ncsl.org/research/telecommunications-and-
information-technology/privacy-legislation-related-to-internet-service-
providers-2018
.aspx.
    \13\ See National Conference of State Legislatures, Data Disposal 
Laws, available at http://www.ncsl.org/research/telecommunications-and-
information-technology/data-disposal-laws
.aspx.
    \14\ See National Conference of State Legislatures, Data Security 
Laws (Oct. 15, 2018), available at http://www.ncsl.org/research/
telecommunications-and-information-technology/data-security-laws.aspx.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Historically, states have also served a critical enforcement role 
in the consumer space, as illustrated by the recent Equifax breach. As 
a result of that breach, the data of over 140 million consumers were 
exposed due to what some members of Congress referred to as 
``malfeasance'' on the part of the company.\15\ Despite this, the 
company posted record profits the following year, and consumers have 
still have not been fully compensated for the cost of credit freezes 
the breach made necessary. While the FTC has an ongoing investigation, 
it has yet to take action. In the meantime, the Massachusetts attorney 
general is currently suing Equifax seeking damages in an attempt to 
obtain compensation for individuals impacted by the breach. In 
addition, several state regulators have entered into a consent decree 
with the company that puts in place new requirements.\16\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \15\ Kevin Liles, Hack Will Lead to Little, if Any, Punishment for 
Equifax, N.Y. TIMES (Sept. 20, 2017), available at https://
www.nytimes.com/2017/09/20/business/equifax-hack-penalties.html.
    \16\ Kate Fazzini, Equifax Gets New To-do List, But No Fines or 
Penalties, CNBC (Jun. 27, 2018), https://www.cnbc.com/2018/06/27/
equifax-breach-consent-order-issued.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    States have been and will continue to be well-positioned to respond 
to emerging privacy challenges in our digital ecosystem. New technology 
will likely require additional protections and experimenting with 
different solutions, and states can serve as laboratories for testing 
these solutions. Thus, we should avoid preemption that could lock in 
place Federal standards that may soon be obsolete or prevent states 
from fully utilizing their enforcement capabilities.
    Preemption would not only be bad for consumers, it would represent 
a shift in the approach taken by many of our existing laws. For 
example, the Telecommunications Act explicitly allows states to enforce 
additional oversight and regulatory systems for telephone equipment, 
provided they do not interfere Federal law; it also permits states to 
regulate additional terms and conditions for mobile phone services. 
Title I of the Affordable Care Act permits states to put in place 
additional consumer protections related to coverage of health insurance 
plans, and HIPPA similarly allows states to enact more stringent 
protections for health information.
    In addition, all 50 states in some way regulate unfair or deceptive 
trade practices, an area also governed by section 5 of the FTC Act.\17\ 
While the strength of these state laws vary, they are harmonious with 
the FTC's mandate and are integral to manageable privacy regulation 
enforcement. Such coordination has historically allowed states to fill 
gaps that Federal regulators simply do not have the resources or 
expertise to address. (An Appendix of additional state privacy laws is 
attached to this testimony.)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \17\ Carolyn Carter, Consumer Protection in the States: A 0-State 
Report on Unfair and Deceptive Acts and Practices Statutes, National 
Consumer Law Center, (Feb. 2019), available at https://www.nclc.org/
images/pdf/udap/report_50_states.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    We recognize that any Federal legislation must account for 
conflicts in cases where it would be impossible for an entity to comply 
with both Federal and state laws. However, this can be accomplished 
through a clear, narrow conflict-preemption provision, which explicitly 
preserves stronger state laws that do not undermine Federal standards, 
maintains state enforcement capabilities, and retains state consumer 
remedies.
II. Federal legislation must contain strong enforcement mechanisms, 
        including a private right of action
    Federal privacy legislation will mean little without robust 
enforcement. Thus, any legislation should grant greater resources and 
enforcement capabilities to the FTC and permit state and local 
authorities to fully enforce Federal law. To fill the inevitable 
government enforcement gaps, however, the ACLU urges Congress to ensure 
that Federal legislation also grants consumers the right to sue 
companies for privacy violations.
    The FTC has a long history of protecting consumer privacy in the 
United States. But, alone and with current resources and authorities, 
it cannot effectively police privacy alone. In the last 20 years, the 
number of employees at the FTC has grown only slightly.\18\ And the 
number of employees in the Division of Privacy and Identity Protection 
(DPIP) and the Division of Enforcement, which are responsible for the 
agency's privacy and data security work, stands at approximately 50 and 
44 people, respectively.\19\ To put this in perspective, this is 
smaller than the Washington, D.C. offices of many large technology 
companies alone. Both the FTC as a whole and DPIP require additional 
resources and employees to address the outsize risks to privacy facing 
consumers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \18\ FTC Fiscal Year 2019 Budget, p. 4, https://www.ftc.gov/system/
files/documents/reports/fy-2019-congressional-budget-justification/
ftc_congressional_budget_justification_fy_2019.pdf
    \19\ Id. at 18.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    And for the agency's investigations and enforcement actions to have 
meaningful deterrent effect, the FTC should be given authority to levy 
significant civil penalties in consumer protection actions for the 
first violation, rather than only in cases where a company is already 
under a consent decree.\20\ It was recently announced that Facebook has 
set aside 3 to 5 billion dollars to pay a potential fine to the FTC for 
its mishandling of personal information, including conduct related to 
Cambridge Analytica.\21\ Following this announcement, Facebook's stock 
value surged nonetheless, suggesting that the FTC's current enforcement 
powers are woefully lacking when measured against the earning potential 
of the largest online businesses.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \20\ See Testimony of FTC Chairman Joseph Simons Before the House 
Committee on Energy and Commerce, 6 (``Section 5 does not provide for 
civil penalties, reducing the Commission's deterrent capability''), 
available at https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/documents/
public_statements
/1394526/p180101_ftc_testimony_re_oversight_house_07182018.pdf.
    \21\ Elizabeth Dwoskin and Tony Romm, Facebook Sets Aside Billions 
of Dollars for Potential FTC Fine, Washington Post (April 24, 2019), 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2019/04/24/facebook-sets-
aside-billions-dollars-potential-ftc-fine/?utm_term=.b09f3d5a6bbd
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    To augment the limited Federal enforcement resources, state and 
local enforcement entities should also be given the power to 
investigate and enforce Federal privacy law. This aligns with the 
approach taken by other laws, including the Fair Debt Collection 
Practices Act, which is enforceable by state Attorneys General as well 
as through a private right of action.\22\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \22\ Letter from Attorneys General of Twenty-One States to House 
and Senate Leadership, April 19, 2018, https://ag.ny.gov/sites/default/
files/hr_5082_multistate_letter.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Even with these reforms, however, the scale and scope of potential 
harm associated with poor privacy practices are too extensive to be 
left to regulators.\23\ Government enforcement will inevitably have 
gaps. Thus, providing consumers a private right of action is also 
critical from an enforcement standpoint--a concept reflected in several 
state approaches. For example, the Illinois Biometric Information 
Privacy Act permits aggrieved individuals whose rights are violated to 
file suit to seek damages.\24\ The Illinois Supreme Court has 
interpreted the law as providing a private right of action to 
individuals who allege a statutory violation of the law.\25\ Similarly, 
recently, the California Attorney General supported legislation that 
would provide a private right of action to consumers in the privacy 
context, noting ``We need to have some help. And that's why giving 
[consumers] their own private right to defend themselves in court if 
the Department of Justice decides it's not acting--for whatever number 
of good reasons--that's important to be able to truly say. . .you have 
rights.'' \26\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \23\ See Letter from California Attorney General Xavier Becerra to 
California Assemblymember Ed Chau and Senator Robert Hertzberg, August 
22, 2018 (``The lack of a private right of action, which would provide 
a critical adjunct to governmental enforcement, will substantially 
increase the [Attorney General's Office's] need for new enforcement 
resources. I urge you to provide consumers with a private right of 
action under the [California Consumer Privacy Act].''), available at 
https://digitalcommons.law.scu.edu/cgi/
viewcontent.cgi?article=2801&context=historical.
    \24\ Biometric Information Privacy Act, supra note 10, 740 ILCS 14/
, Section 20.
    \25\ Rosenbach v. Six Flags Entertainment Corp., 2019 IL 123186 
(2019).
    \26\ Cheryl Miller, Becerra Backs Bill Giving Consumers Power to 
Sue for Data Privacy Violations, LAW.COM: THE RECORDER (Feb. 25, 2019), 
https://www.law.com/therecorder/2019/02/25/becerra-backs-bill-giving-
consumers-power-to-sue-for-data-privacy-violations/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    In order to be effective, a private right of action should have two 
key protections for consumers. First, it should specify statutory 
damages for all violations of privacy rights, not just instances where 
a consumer has offered conclusive proof of tangible damages. When 
conduct is potentially harmful, statutory damages offer a compelling 
solution. In copyright infringement, for example, statutory damages can 
range from $750 to $30,000 per work infringed.\27\ Similarly, the Fair 
Debt Collection Practices Act provides for statutory damages of up to 
$1,000 per violation.\28\ These statutory-damage provisions encourage 
rigorous compliance by establishing that violations carry a significant 
penalty. Privacy law should do the same.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \27\ 17 U.S.C. Sec. 504(c)(2).
    \28\ 15 USC 1692k.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Second, consumers should be protected against mandatory arbitration 
clauses buried in terms of service that restrict their rights to have a 
court hear their claims and undermine the ability of class actions to 
collectively redress privacy violations.\29\ One Federal judge called 
these arbitration clauses ``a totally coerced waiver of both the right 
to a jury and the right of access to the courts'' that are ``based on 
nothing but factual and legal fictions.'' \30\ Similarly, in a dissent 
in this term's Lamps Plus case, Justice Ginsburg noted, ``mandatory 
individual arbitration continues to thwart `effective access to 
justice' for those encountering diverse violations of their legal 
rights.'' \31\ Privacy law should neither tolerate such waivers nor 
indulge the legal and factual fictions that underlie them.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \29\ Jessica Silver-Greenberg & Robert Gebeloff, Arbitration 
Everywhere, Stacking the Deck of Justice, N.Y. Times, October 31, 2015, 
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/01/business/deal
book/arbitration-everywhere-stacking-the-deck-of-justice.html.
    \30\ Meyer v. Kalanick, 291 F. Supp. 3d 526, 529 (S.D.N.Y. 2018).
    \31\ Lamps Plus v. Varela, 587 U.S. __(2019)(Ginsburg, R., 
dissenting).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
III. Federal legislation should guard against discrimination in the 
        digital ecosystem
    Existing Federal laws prohibit discrimination in the credit, 
employment, and housing context. Any Federal privacy legislation should 
ensure such prohibitions apply fully in the digital ecosystem and are 
robustly enforced. In addition, we urge Congress to strengthen existing 
laws to guard against unfair discrimination, including in cases where 
it may stem from algorithmic bias.
    Many online providers have been slow to fully comply with Federal 
antidiscrimination laws. The rise of big data and personalized 
marketing has enabled new forms of discrimination that run afoul of 
existing Federal laws, including Title VII of the Civil Rights Act, the 
Age Discrimination in Employment Act, the Fair Housing Act, and the 
Equal Credit Opportunity Act. For example, Facebook recently settled a 
lawsuit brought by ACLU and other civil rights organizations amid 
allegations that it discriminated on the basis of gender and age in 
targeting ads for housing and employment.\32\ The lawsuit followed 
repeated failures by the company to fully respond to studies 
demonstrating that the platform improperly permitted ad targeting based 
on prohibited characteristics, like race, or proxies for such 
characteristics. The company is also now the subject of charges brought 
by the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), which 
includes similar allegations.\33\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \32\ ACLU, Facebook Agrees to Sweeping Reforms to Curb 
Discriminatory Ad Targeting Practices (Mar. 19, 2019), https://
www.aclu.org/news/facebook-agrees-sweeping-reforms-curb-discriminatory-
ad-targeting-practices.
    \33\ Complaint of Discrimination Against Facebook, FHEO No. 01-18-
032308, https://www
.hud.gov/sites/dfiles/Main/documents/HUD_v_Facebook.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Outside the credit, employment, and housing contexts, 
discriminatory targeting and marketing may also raise civil rights 
concerns. For example, commercial advertisers should not be permitted 
to offer different prices, services, or opportunities to individuals, 
or to exclude them from receiving ads offering certain commercial 
benefits, based on characteristics like their gender or race. And 
regulators and consumers should be given information and tools to 
address algorithms or machine learning models that disparately impact 
individuals on the basis of protected characteristics.
    Federal law must be strengthened to address these challenges. 
First, Federal privacy law should make clear that existing 
antidiscrimination laws apply fully in the online ecosystem, including 
in online marketing and advertising. Federal agencies that enforce 
these laws, like HUD, the EEOC, and the Consumer Financial Protection 
Bureau, should be fully resourced and given the technical capabilities 
to vigorously enforce the law in the context of these new forms of 
digital discrimination. In addition, companies should be required to 
audit their data processing practices for bias and privacy risks, and 
such audits should be made available to regulators and disclosed 
publicly, with redactions if necessary to protect proprietary 
information. Finally, researchers should be permitted to independently 
audit platforms for bias, and Congress should not permit enforcement of 
terms of service that interfere with such testing.
IV. Federal privacy legislation must place limits on how personal 
        information can be collected, used, and retained
    Legislation must include real protections that consider the modern 
reality of how people's personal information is collected, retained, 
and used. The law should limit the purposes for which consumer data can 
be used, require purging of data after permissible uses have completed, 
prevent coercive conditioning of services on waiving privacy rights, 
and limit so-called ``pay for privacy'' schemes. Otherwise, we risk 
ending up in the same place we began--with consumers simply checking 
boxes to consent with no real understanding of or control over how 
their data will be used.
    This current broken privacy regime has largely been built around 
the concept of ``notice and consent'': as long as a company includes a 
description of what it is doing somewhere in a lengthy fine-print 
click-through ``agreement,'' and the consumer ``agrees'' (which they 
must do to utilize a service), then the company is broadly regarded as 
having met its privacy obligations. And legally, a company is most 
vulnerable if it violates specific promises in those click-through 
agreements or other advertisements.\34\ An ecosystem of widespread 
privacy invasions has grown out of the impossible legal fiction that 
consumers read and understand such agreements.\35\ The truth is that 
consumers do not have real transparency into how their data is being 
used and abused, and they do not have meaningful control over how their 
data is used once it leaves their hands.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \34\ Dave Perrerra, FTC privacy enforcement focuses on deception, 
not unfairness, Mlex Market Insight, February 22, 2019, available at 
https://mlexmarketinsight.com/insights-center/editors-picks/Data-
Protection-Privacy-and-Security/north-america/ftc-privacy-enforcement-
focuses-on-deception,-not-unfairness.
    \35\ See Alex Madrigal, Reading the Privacy Policies You Encounter 
in a Year Would Take 76 Work Days, THE ATLANTIC (Mar 1. 2012), 
available at https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2012/03/
reading-the-privacy-policies-you-encounter-in-a-year-would-take-76-
work-days/253851/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Worse, technologists and academics have found that advertising 
companies ``innovate'' in online tracking technologies to resist 
consumers' attempts to defeat that tracking. This is done by, for 
example, using multiple identifiers that replicate each other, virus-
like, when users attempt to delete them. Technical circumvention of 
privacy protections is sufficiently commonplace that data brokers are 
even offering what is effectively re-identification as a service, 
promising the ability to ``reach customers, not cookies.'' \36\ 
Advertisers, the experts conclude, ``use new, relatively unknown 
technologies to track people, specifically because consumers have not 
heard of these techniques. Furthermore, these technologies obviate 
choice mechanisms that consumers exercise.'' \37\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \36\ Reach Customers, Not Just Cookies, LiveRamp Blog, September 
10, 2015 (available at https://liveramp.com/blog/reach-customers-not-
just-cookies/) (``Cookies are like an anonymous ID that cannot identify 
you as a person.'').
    \37\ Chris Jay Hoofnagle, et al, Behavioral Advertising: The Offer 
You Cannot Refuse, 6 Harvard Law & Policy Review (Aug. 2010), available 
at https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?
abstract_id=2137601.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    In short, not only have consumers lost control over how and when 
they are monitored online, companies are actively working to defeat 
efforts to resist that monitoring. Currently, individuals who want 
privacy must attempt to win a technological arms race with the multi-
billion dollar Internet-advertising industry. American consumers are 
not content with this state of affairs. Numerous polls show that the 
current online ecosystem makes people profoundly uncomfortable.\38\ 
Similarly, recent polling released by the ACLU of California showed 
overwhelming support for measures adding strong privacy protections to 
the law, including requiring that companies get permission before 
sharing people's personal information.\39\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \38\ See, e.g., Marc Fisher & Craig Timberg, American Uneasy About 
Surveillance but Often Use Snooping Tools, Post Poll Finds, Wash. Post 
(Dec. 21, 2013), https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-
security/americans-uneasy-about-surveillance-but-often-use-snooping-
tools-post-poll-finds/2013/12/21/ca15e990-67f9-11e3-ae56-
22de072140a2_story.html; Edward Baig, Internet Users Say, Don't Track 
Me, U.S.A. Today (Dec. 14, 2010), http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/money/
advertising/2010-12-14-donottrackpoll14_ST_N.htm; Joseph Turow et. al., 
Contrary to What Marketers Say, Americans Reject Tailored Advertising 
and Three Activities that Enable It (2009), https://www.nytimes.com/
packages/pdf/business/20090929-Tailored_Advertising.pdf.
    \39\ California Voters Overwhelmingly Support Stronger Consumer 
Privacy Protections, New Data Shows, ACLU of Northern California, 
available at https://www.aclunc.org/news/california-voters-
overwhelmingly-support-stronger-consumer-privacy-protections-new-data-
shows.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    To address these deficiencies, privacy legislation should include a 
meaningful ``opt-in'' baseline rule for the collection and sharing of 
personal information. To be meaningful, protections must not allow 
businesses to force consumers, in order to participate fully in 
society, to ``agree'' to arcane lengthy, agreements that they cannot 
understand. Legislation should also support technological opt-in 
mechanisms such as ``do not track'' flags in web browsers by requiring 
that companies honor those flags. In addition to this, Federal 
legislation should approach the collection (and especially use) of 
personal information that is not necessary for the provision of a 
service with skepticism.
    Moreover, the law should reject so-called ``pay-for-privacy'' 
schemes, which allow companies to offer a more expensive or lower 
quality product to people who exercise privacy rights. These kinds of 
schemes discourage everyone from exercising their privacy rights, and 
risk causing disastrous follow-on consequences for people who are 
already financially struggling.\40\ Privacy is a right that everyone 
should have, not just people with the ability to pay for it.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \40\ Mary Madden, The Devastating Consequences of Being Poor in the 
Digital Age, The New York Times, April 25, 2019 (``When those who 
influence policy and technology design have a lower perception of 
privacy risk themselves, it contributes to a lack of investment in the 
kind of safeguards and protections that vulnerable communities both 
want and urgently need.'') (available at https://www.nytimes.com/2019/
04/25/opinion/privacy-poverty.html).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
V. Conclusion
    The current Federal privacy framework is failing consumers. But, in 
enacting Federal privacy legislation, Congress must ensure that it does 
not do more harm than good by preempting existing and future state laws 
that protect consumers. Moreover, it must ensure that its reforms 
amount to more than just a fig leaf. Consumers do not need another box 
to check; they need limits on how companies can treat their data, the 
ability to enforce their privacy rights in court, and protection 
against digital discrimination. These reforms and others are necessary 
to prevent exploitation of data from being used to exacerbate 
inequality, unfairly discriminate, and undermine security.
                      Appendix. State Privacy Laws
    The chart below provides a list of some existing state privacy 
laws. This is not an exhaustive list of all state consumer privacy 
laws, nor does it include all general laws that may be relevant in the 
consumer privacy context.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Summary and/or Relevant
       State                    Provisions                   Source
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Alabama             8Data security. Requires business  Ala. Code 1975
                     entities and government to         Sec.  8-38-1 to
                     provide notice to certain          12 (``Alabama
                     persons upon a breach of           Data Breach
                     security that results in the       Notification Act
                     unauthorized acquisition of        of 2018'')0
                     sensitive personally identifying
                     information. Provides standards
                     of reasonable security measures
                     and investigations into
                     breaches.
 
                    Deceptive Trade Practices Act.     Ala. Code Sec.
                     Broadly prohibits unfair,          Sec.  8-19-1 to
                     deceptive, or unconscionable       15
                     acts. Creates a private right of
                     action and gives Attorney
                     General and district attorneys
                     power to enforce statute.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Alaska              8Breach notification law that      Alaska Stat. Ann.
                     provides for: (1) notice           Sec.  45.48.010
                     requirement when a breach of       (``Alaska
                     security concerning personal       Personal
                     information has occurred; (2)      Information
                     ability to place a security        Act'')0
                     freeze on a consumer credit
                     report; (3) various restrictions
                     on the use of personal
                     information and credit
                     information; (4) disposal of
                     records containing personal
                     information; (5) allowing a
                     victim of identity theft to
                     petition the court for a
                     determination of factual
                     innocence; and (6) truncation of
                     credit card information. The SSN
                     section also states that no one
                     can require disclosure of a SSN
                     to access a product or service.
 
                    State constitution: ``The right    Alaska Const.
                     of the people to privacy is        art. I, Sec.  22
                     recognized and shall not be
                     infringed. The legislature shall
                     implement this section.''
 
                    8Unfair Trade Practices and        Alaska Stat. Sec.
                     Consumer Protection Act. Broadly   Sec.  45.50.471
                     prohibits unfair, deceptive, or    to .5610
                     unconscionable acts. Creates a
                     private right of action and
                     gives Attorney General and
                     district attorneys power to
                     enforce statute.
 
                    When disposing of records that     Alaska Stat. Sec.
                     contain personal information, a     45.48.500
                     business and a governmental
                     agency shall take all reasonable
                     measures necessary to protect
                     against unauthorized access to
                     or use of the records.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Arizona             8Provides that public library or   Ariz. Rev. Stat.
                     library systems shall not allow    Sec.  41-151.220
                     disclosure of records or other
                     information which identifies a
                     user of library services as
                     requesting or obtaining specific
                     materials or services or as
                     otherwise using the library.
 
                    State constitution: ``No person    Ariz. Const. art.
                     shall be disturbed in his          II Sec.  8
                     private affairs, or his home
                     invaded, without authority of
                     law.''
 
                    8Consumer Fraud Act. Broadly       Ariz. Rev. Stat.
                     prohibits unfair, deceptive, or    Ann. Sec. Sec.
                     unconscionable acts. Gives         44-1521 through
                     Attorney General power to          44-15340
                     enforce statute.
 
                    Entity must discard and dispose    Ariz. Rev. Stat.
                     of records containing personal     Sec.  44-7601
                     identifying information.
                     Enforceable by attorney general
                     or a county attorney.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Arkansas            8Requires government websites or   Ark. Code Ann.
                     state portals to establish         Sec.  25-1-1140
                     privacy policies and procedures
                     and incorporate machine-readable
                     privacy policies into their
                     websites
 
                    Data security law that applies to  Ark. Code Sec.  4-
                     a person or business that          110-101 to -10
                     acquires, owns, or licenses        (Personal
                     personal information. Requires     Information
                     implementation and maintenance     Protection Act)
                     of reasonable security             amended in 2019
                     procedures and practices           Arkansas Law Act
                     appropriate to the nature of the   1030 (H.B. 1943)
                     information. Amended to include
                     biometric data.
 
                    8Prevents employers from           Ark. Code Ann.
                     requesting passwords to personal   Sec.  11-2-1240
                     Internet accounts to get or keep
                     a job.
 
                    Prohibits use of Automated         Ark. Code Sec.
                     License Plate Readers (ALPRs) by   Sec.  12-12-1801
                     individuals, partnerships,         to 12-12-1808
                     companies, associations or state   (``Automatic
                     agencies. Provides exceptions      License Plate
                     for limited use by law             Reader System
                     enforcement, by parking            Act'')
                     enforcement entities, or for
                     controlling access to secure
                     areas. Prohibits data from being
                     preserved for more than 150
                     days.
 
                    8Deceptive Trade Practices Act.    Ark. Code Ann.
                     Broadly prohibits deceptive and    Sec. Sec.  4-88-
                     unconscionable trade practices.    101 through 4-88-
                     Makes it a misdemeanor to          2070
                     knowingly and willfully commit
                     unlawful practice under the law
                     and gives attorney general power
                     of civil enforcement and to
                     create a Consumer Advisory
                     Board.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
California          Gives consumers right to request   Cal. Civ. Code
                     a business to disclose the         Sec.  1798.100
                     categories and specific pieces     to .198 (``The
                     of personal information that the   California
                     business has collected about the   Consumer Privacy
                     consumers and the source of that   Act of 2018'')
                     information and business purpose
                     for collecting the information.
                     Consumers may request that a
                     business delete personal
                     information that the business
                     collected from the consumers.
                     Consumers have the right to opt
                     out of a business's sale of
                     their personal information, and
                     a business may not discriminate
                     against consumers who opt out.
                     Applies to California residents.
                     Effective Jan. 1, 2020.
 
                    8State constitution: ``All people  Cal. Const. art.
                     are by nature free and             I Sec. Sec.  1,
                     independent and have inalienable   230
                     rights. Among these are enjoying
                     and defending life and liberty,
                     acquiring, possessing, and
                     protecting property, and
                     pursuing and obtaining safety,
                     happiness, and privacy.''
 
                    8``Every natural person has the
                     right to be let alone and free
                     from governmental intrusion into
                     the person's private life except
                     as otherwise provided herein.
                     This section shall not be
                     construed to limit the public's
                     right of access to public
                     records and meetings as provided
                     by law.''0
 
                    Require government websites or     Cal. Govt. Code
                     state portals to establish and     Sec.  11019.9
                     publish privacy policies and
                     procedures
 
                    8Permits minors to remove, or to   Cal. Bus. & Prof.
                     request and obtain removal of,     Code Sec. Sec.
                     content or information posted on   22580-22582
                     website, online service, online    (``California's
                     application, or mobile             Privacy Rights
                     application. Prohibits operator    for California
                     of a website or online service     Minors in the
                     directed to minors from            Digital World
                     marketing or advertising           Act'')0
                     specified products or services
                     that minors are legally
                     prohibited from buying.
                     Prohibits marketing or
                     advertising products based on
                     personal information specific to
                     a minor or knowingly using,
                     disclosing, compiling, or
                     allowing a third party to do so.
 
                    Protects a library patron's use    Cal. Govt. Code
                     records, such as written records   Sec.  6267
                     or electronic transaction that
                     identifies a patron's borrowing
                     information or use of library
                     information resources,
                     including, but not limited to,
                     database search records,
                     borrowing records, class
                     records, and any other
                     personally identifiable uses of
                     library resources information
                     requests, or inquiries
 
                    8Protects information about the    Cal. Civil Code
                     books Californians browse, read    Sec.  1798.90
                     or purchase from electronic        (``Reader
                     services and online booksellers    Privacy Act'')0
                     who may have access to detailed
                     information about readers, such
                     as specific pages browsed.
                     Requires a search warrant, court
                     order, or the user's affirmative
                     consent before such a business
                     can disclose the personal
                     information of its users related
                     to their use of a book, with
                     specified exceptions, including
                     an imminent danger of death or
                     serious injury.
 
                    Operator of a commercial website   Cal. Bus. & Prof.
                     or online service must disclose    Code Sec.  22575
                     in its privacy policy how it
                     responds to a web browser 'do
                     not track' signal or similar
                     mechanisms providing consumers
                     with the ability to exercise
                     choice about online tracking of
                     their personal information
                     across sites or services and
                     over time. Operator must
                     disclose whether third parties
                     are or may be conducting such
                     tracking on the operator's site
                     or service.
 
                    8Operator, defined as a person or  Calif. Bus. &
                     entity that collects personally    Prof. Code Sec.
                     identifiable information from      22575-22578
                     California residents through an    (CalOPPA)0
                     Internet website or online
                     service for commercial purposes,
                     must post a conspicuous privacy
                     policy on its website or online
                     service (which may include
                     mobile apps) and to comply with
                     that policy. The privacy policy
                     must identify the categories of
                     personally identifiable
                     information that the operator
                     collects about individual
                     consumers who use or visit its
                     website or online service and
                     third parties with whom the
                     operator may share the
                     information.
 
                    Prohibits a person or entity from  Cal. Bus. & Prof.
                     providing the operation of a       Code Sec.
                     voice recognition feature in       22948.20
                     California without prominently
                     informing, during the initial
                     setup or installation of a
                     connected television, either the
                     user or the person designated by
                     the user to perform the initial
                     setup or installation of the
                     connected television. Prohibits
                     manufacturers or third-party
                     contractors from collecting any
                     actual recordings of spoken word
                     for the purpose of improving the
                     voice recognition feature.
                     Prohibits a person or entity
                     from compelling a manufacturer
                     or other entity providing the
                     operation of voice recognition
                     to build specific features to
                     allow an investigative or law
                     enforcement officer to monitor
                     communications through that
                     feature.
 
                    8Requires private nonprofit or     Cal. Educ. Code
                     for-profit postsecondary           Sec.  991220
                     educational institutions to post
                     a social media privacy policy on
                     the institution's website
 
                    Requires all nonfinancial          Cal. Civ. Code
                     businesses to disclose to          Sec. Sec.  1798.
                     customers the types of personal    83 to .84
                     information the business shares
                     with or sells to a third party
                     for direct marketing purposes or
                     for compensation. Businesses may
                     post a privacy statement that
                     gives customers the opportunity
                     to choose not to share
                     information at no cost.
 
                    8Breach notification requirements  Cal. Civ. Code
                     when unencrypted personal          Sec. Sec.  1798.
                     information, or encrypted          29, 1798.820
                     personal information and the
                     security credentials, was or
                     reasonably believed to have been
                     acquired by an unauthorized
                     person. Applies to agencies and
                     businesses.
 
                    Data security. Applies to a        Cal Civ. Code
                     business that owns, licenses, or   Sec.  1798.81.5
                     maintains personal information &
                     third-party contractors. Must
                     implement and maintain
                     reasonable security procedures
                     and practices appropriate to the
                     nature of the information.
 
                    8Provides that the California      Cal. Vehicle Code
                     Highway Patrol (CHP) may retain    Sec.  24130
                     data from a license plate reader
                     for no more than 60 days, unless
                     the data is being used as
                     evidence in felony cases.
                     Prohibits selling or making
                     available ALPR data to non-law
                     enforcement officers or
                     agencies. Requires CHP to report
                     to the legislature how ALPR data
                     is being used.
 
                    Establishes regulations on the     Cal. Civ. Code
                     privacy and usage of automatic     Sec. Sec.  1798.
                     license plate recognition (ALPR)   90.50 to .55
                     data and expands the meaning of
                     ``personal information'' to
                     include information or data
                     collected through the use or
                     operation of an ALPR system.
                     Imposes privacy protection
                     requirements on entities that
                     use ALPR information, as
                     defined; prohibit public
                     agencies from selling or sharing
                     ALPR information, except to
                     another public agency, as
                     specified; and require operators
                     of ALPR systems to use that
                     information only for authorized
                     purposes. Establishes private
                     right of action.
 
                    8Prohibits unfair competition,     Cal. Bus. & Prof.
                     which includes any unlawful,       Code Sec. Sec.
                     unfair, or fraudulent business     17200 through
                     act or practice.                   175940
 
                    Prohibits unfair methods of        Cal. Civ. Code
                     competition and unfair or          Sec. Sec.  1750
                     deceptive acts or practices        through 1785
                     undertaken by any person in a      (``Consumer
                     transaction intended to result     Legal Remedies
                     or that results in the sale or     Act'')
                     lease of goods or services to a
                     consumer. Provides a private
                     right of action.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Colorado            8Requires the state or any         Colo. Rev. Stat.
                     agency, institution, or            Sec.  24-72-204.
                     political subdivision that         50
                     operates or maintains an
                     electronic mail communications
                     system to adopt a written policy
                     on any monitoring of electronic
                     mail communications and the
                     circumstances under which it
                     will be conducted. The policy
                     shall include a statement that
                     correspondence of the employee
                     in the form of electronic mail
                     may be a public record under the
                     public records law and may be
                     subject to public inspection
                     under this part.
 
                    Requires government websites or    Colo. Rev. Stat.
                     state portals to establish and     Sec.  24-72-501
                     publish privacy policies and       to -502
                     procedures
 
                    8Data security. Applies to any     Colo. Rev. Stat.
                     private entity that maintains,     Sec.  6-1-713,
                     owns, or licenses personal         Sec.  6-1-7160
                     identifying information in the
                     course of the person's business
                     or occupation. Must develop
                     written policies for proper
                     disposal of personal information
                     once such information is no
                     longer needed. Implement and
                     maintain reasonable security
                     practices and procedures to
                     protect personal identifying
                     information from unauthorized
                     access.
 
                    Requires that video or still       Colo. Rev. Stat.
                     images obtained by ``passive       Sec.  24-72-113
                     surveillance'' by governmental
                     entities, such as images from
                     monitoring cameras, must be
                     destroyed within three years
                     after the recording of the
                     images. Specifies that the
                     custodian of a passive
                     surveillance record may only
                     access the record beyond the
                     first anniversary after the date
                     of creation of the record if
                     there has been a notice of claim
                     filed, or an accident or other
                     specific incident that may cause
                     the passive surveillance record
                     to become evidence in any civil,
                     labor, administrative, or felony
                     criminal proceeding. Creates
                     exceptions allowing retention of
                     passive surveillance records of
                     any correctional facility, local
                     jail, or private contract prison
                     and passive surveillance records
                     made or maintained as required
                     under Federal law
 
                    8Prohibits deceptive trade         Colo. Rev. Stat.
                     practices. Attorney generals and   Sec. Sec.  6-1-1
                     district attorneys enforce         01 through 6-1-
                     statute.                           1150
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Connecticut         Requires any person who collects   Conn. Gen. Stat.
                     Social Security numbers in the     Sec.  42-471
                     course of business to create a
                     privacy protection policy. The
                     policy must be ``publicly
                     displayed'' by posting on a web
                     page and the policy must (1)
                     protect the confidentiality, (2)
                     prohibit unlawful disclosure,
                     and (3) limit access to Social
                     Security numbers.
 
                    8Employers who engage in any type  Conn. Gen. Stat.
                     of electronic monitoring must      Sec.  31-48d0
                     give prior written notice to all
                     employees, informing them of the
                     types of monitoring which may
                     occur. If employer has
                     reasonable grounds to believe
                     that employees are engaged in
                     illegal conduct and electronic
                     monitoring may produce evidence
                     of this misconduct, the employer
                     may conduct monitoring without
                     giving prior written notice.
                     Labor Commissioner may levy
                     civil penalties against a
                     violator who fails to give
                     notice of monitoring.
 
                    Health data security law that      Conn. Gen. Stat.
                     applies to any health insurer,     Sec.  38a-999b
                     health care center or other
                     entity licensed to do health
                     insurance business in the state.
                     Requires them to implement and
                     maintain a comprehensive
                     information security program to
                     safeguard the personal
                     information of insureds and
                     enrollees that is compiled or
                     maintained by such company.
 
                    8Data security law that applies    Conn. Gen. Stat.
                     to contractors, defined as an      Sec.  4e-700
                     individual, business or other
                     entity that is receiving
                     confidential information from a
                     state contracting agency or
                     agent of the state pursuant to a
                     written agreement to provide
                     goods or services to the state.
                     Must implement and maintain a
                     comprehensive data-security
                     program, including encryption of
                     all sensitive personal data
                     transmitted wirelessly or via a
                     public Internet connection, or
                     contained on portable electronic
                     devices.
 
                    Prohibits unfair or deceptive      Conn. Gen. Stat.
                     acts or practices in the conduct   Sec. Sec.  42-11
                     of any trade or commerce.          0a through 42-
                     Commissioner enforces. Creates     110q
                     private right of action.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Delaware            8Prohibits operators of websites,  Del. Code Ann.
                     online or cloud computing          tit. 6, Sec.
                     services, online applications,     1204C0
                     or mobile applications directed
                     at children from marketing or
                     advertising on its Internet
                     service specified products or
                     services. When the marketing is
                     provided by an advertising
                     service, the operator of
                     Prohibits disclosing a child's
                     personally identifiable
                     information if it is known that
                     the child's personally
                     identifiable information will be
                     used to market those products or
                     services to the child.
 
                    Requires an operator of a          Del. Code Ann.
                     commercial Internet website,       tit. 6, Sec.
                     online or cloud computing          1205C
                     service, online application, or
                     mobile application that collects
                     personally identifiable
                     information through the Internet
                     about individual users residing
                     in Delaware to make its privacy
                     policy conspicuously available.
                     An operator shall be in
                     violation of this subsection
                     only if the operator fails to
                     make its privacy policy
                     conspicuously available within
                     30 days after being notified of
                     noncompliance.
 
                    8Prohibits a commercial entity     Del. Code Ann.
                     which provides a book service      tit. 6, Sec.
                     from disclosing users' personal    1206C0
                     information to law enforcement
                     entities, governmental entities,
                     or other persons, except under
                     specified circumstances. Allows
                     immediate disclosure of a user's
                     book service information to law
                     enforcement entities when there
                     is an imminent danger of death
                     or serious physical. Requires a
                     book service provider to prepare
                     and post online an annual report
                     on its disclosures of personal
                     information, unless exempted
                     from doing so. The Consumer
                     Protection Unit of the
                     Department of Justice has the
                     authority to investigate and
                     prosecute violations of the
                     acts.
 
                    Prohibits employers from           Del. Code Ann.
                     monitoring or intercepting         tit. 19, Sec.
                     electronic mail or Internet        705
                     access or usage of an employee
                     unless the employer has first
                     given a one-time notice to the
                     employee. Provides exceptions
                     for processes that are performed
                     solely for the purpose of
                     computer system maintenance and/
                     or protection, and for court
                     ordered actions. Provides for a
                     civil penalty of $100 for each
                     violation.
 
                    8Require government websites or    Del. Code tit. 29
                     state portals to establish and     Sec.  9018C0
                     publish privacy policies and
                     procedures
 
                    Prohibits deceptive acts in        Del. Code Ann.
                     connection with the sale, lease,   tit. 6, Sec.
                     or advertisement of any            Sec.  2511
                     merchandise. Gives investigative   through 2527,
                     power to attorney general and      2580 through
                     creates a private right of         2584 (``Consumer
                     action.                            Fraud Act'')
 
                    8Any person who conducts business  Del. Code Sec.
                     in the state and owns, licenses,   12B-1000
                     or maintains personal
                     information must implement and
                     maintain reasonable procedures
                     and practices to prevent the
                     unauthorized acquisition, use,
                     modification, disclosure, or
                     destruction of personal
                     information collected or
                     maintained in the regular course
                     of business.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
District of         Prohibits unfair or deceptive      D.C. Code Sec.
 Columbia            trade practices involving any      Sec.  28-3901
                     and all parts of economic output   through 28-3913
                     of society.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Florida             8State constitution: The right of  Fla. Const. art.
                     the people to be secure in their   I Sec.  120
                     persons, houses, papers, and
                     effects against unreasonable
                     searches and seizures, and
                     against the unreasonable
                     interception of private
                     communications by any means,
                     shall not be violated
 
                    Data security law that applies to  Fla. Stat. Ann.
                     commercial entities and third-     Sec.  501.171
                     party agents (entity that has
                     been contracted to maintain,
                     store, or process personal
                     information on behalf of a
                     covered entity or governmental
                     entity). Requires reasonable
                     measures to protect and secure
                     data in electronic form
                     containing personal information.
 
                    8Creates a public records          Fla. Stat. Ann.
                     exemption for certain images and   Sec.  316.07770
                     data obtained through the use of
                     an automated license plate
                     recognition system and personal
                     identifying information of an
                     individual in data generated
                     from such images. Provides that
                     images and data containing
                     personal information obtained
                     from automated license plate
                     recognition systems are
                     confidential. Allows for
                     disclosure to criminal justice
                     agencies and to individuals to
                     whom the license plate is
                     registered in certain
                     circumstances.
 
                    Prohibits unfair or deceptive      Fla. Stat. Sec.
                     acts or practices in the conduct   Sec.  501.201
                     of any trade of commerce,          through 501.213
                     defined as advertising,            ('' Deceptive
                     soliciting, providing, offering,   and Unfair Trade
                     or distributing commodity or       Practices Act'')
                     thing of value. Creates private
                     right of action.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Georgia             8License plate data may be         Ga. Code Ann.
                     collected and accessed only for    Sec.  35-1-220
                     a law enforcement purpose. The
                     data must be destroyed no later
                     than 30 months after it was
                     originally collected unless the
                     data are the subject matter of a
                     toll violation or for law
                     enforcement. Allows sharing of
                     captured license plate data
                     among law enforcement agencies.
                     Law enforcement agencies
                     deploying an automated license
                     plate recognition system must
                     maintain policies for the use
                     and operation of the system,
                     including but not limited to
                     policies for the training of law
                     enforcement officers in the use
                     of captured license plate data
 
                    Broadly prohibits unfair and       Ga. Code Ann.
                     deceptive practices in the         Sec. Sec.  10-1-
                     conduct of consumer                390 through 10-1-
                     transactions, defined as the       407 (``Fair
                     sale, purchase, lease, or rental   Business
                     of goods, services, or property.   Practices Act'')
                     Creates private right of action.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hawaii              8Any business or government        Haw. Stat. Sec.
                     agency that collects personal      487N-1 to N-70
                     information shall provide notice
                     upon discovery of a security
                     breach. Establishes a council
                     that will identify best privacy
                     practices.
 
                    State constitution: ``The right    Haw. Const. art.
                     of the people to privacy is        I Sec. Sec.  6,
                     recognized and shall not be        7
                     infringed without the showing of
                     a compelling state interest. The
                     legislature shall take
                     affirmative steps to implement
                     this right.''
 
                    ``The right of the people to be
                     secure in their persons, houses,
                     papers and effects against
                     unreasonable searches, seizures
                     and invasions of privacy shall
                     not be violated; and no warrants
                     shall issue but upon probable
                     cause, supported by oath or
                     affirmation, and particularly
                     describing the place to be
                     searched and the persons or
                     things to be seized or the
                     communications sought to be
                     intercepted.''
 
                    8Prohibits unfair competition      Haw. Rev. Stat.
                     against any person and unfair or   Sec.  480-20
                     deceptive acts or practices,
                     enforceable by any consumer.
                     Applies to the conduct of any
                     trade or commerce.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Idaho               Prohibits use of drones to         Idaho Code Sec.
                     capture images of people or        21-213
                     gather information about
                     individuals in the absence of a
                     warrant or written consent.
 
                    8Imposes regulations on            Idaho Code Sec.
                     individual student data,           33-1330
                     restricts secondary uses of such
                     data, and provides for data
                     destruction
 
                    Broadly prohibits unfair or        Idaho Code Ann.
                     deceptive acts and practices in    Sec. Sec.  48-60
                     the conduct of any trade or        1 through 48-619
                     commerce. An unconscionable act    (``Consumer
                     is a violation whether it occurs   Protection
                     before, during, or after the       Act'')
                     transaction.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Illinois            8Prohibits state agency websites   Ill. Rev. Stat.
                     to use cookies or other invasive   ch. 5 Sec.  177/
                     tracking programs to monitor       100
                     viewing habits
 
                    Limits on collection and storage   740 Ill. Comp.
                     of biometric data. Prohibits       Stat. 14/1
                     private entity from capturing or   (Biometric
                     obtaining biometric information    Information
                     without notice and consent.        Privacy Act)
                     Creates private right of action
 
                    8State constitution: ``The people  Ill. Const. art.
                     shall have the right to be         I, Sec.  60
                     secure in their persons, houses,
                     papers and other possessions
                     against unreasonable searches,
                     seizures, invasions of privacy
                     or interceptions of
                     communications by eavesdropping
                     devices or other means. No
                     warrant shall issue without
                     probable cause, supported by
                     affidavit particularly
                     describing the place to be
                     searched and the persons or
                     things to be seized.
 
                    Makes it unlawful for an employer  820 Ill. Comp.
                     or prospective employer to         Stat. 55/10
                     request or require an employee     (Right to
                     or applicant to authenticate or    Privacy in the
                     access a personal online account   Workplace Act)
                     in the presence of the employer,
                     to request or require that an
                     employee or applicant invite the
                     employer to join a certain
                     group, or join an online account
                     established by the employer;
                     prohibits retaliation against an
                     employee or applicant.
 
                    8Broadly prohibits unfair methods  815 Ill. Comp.
                     of competition and unfair or       Stat. 505/1
                     deceptive acts or practice in      through 505/120
                     the conduct of any trade or
                     commerce.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Indiana             Data Security. Applies to          Ind. Code Sec.
                     database owner, defined as a       24-4.9-3-3.5
                     person that owns or licenses
                     computerized data that includes
                     personal information. Must
                     implement and maintain
                     reasonable procedures, including
                     taking any appropriate
                     corrective action for breaches.
 
                    8Prohibits unfair, abusive, or     Ind. Code Sec.
                     deceptive act, omission, or        Sec.  24-5-0.5-1
                     practice in connection with a      to -12
                     consumer transaction. Creates      (``Deceptive
                     private right of action for a      Consumer Sales
                     person relying upon an uncured     Act'')0
                     or incurable deceptive act.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Iowa                Require government Websites or     Iowa Code Sec.
                     state portals to establish and     22.11
                     publish privacy policies and
                     procedures.
 
                    8Prohibits unfair and deceptive    Iowa Code Sec.
                     acts in connection with the        Sec.  714.16
                     lease, sale, or advertisement of   through 714.16A0
                     any merchandise. Enforceable
                     only by the Attorney General,
                     unless there was intent to cause
                     reliance upon the act in which
                     case consumers can enforce the
                     prohibition.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Kansas              Defines breach of privacy such as  K.S. Stat Sec.
                     intercepting phone calls and       21-6101
                     private messages, use of
                     recording devices inside or
                     outside of a place without prior
                     consent, use of video recording
                     without prior consent. Does not
                     apply to utility companies where
                     recording communications is
                     necessary in order to provide
                     the service/utility requested.
 
                    8Data security. Applies to a       K.S. Sec.  50-
                     holder of personal information     6,139b0
                     (a person who, in the ordinary
                     course of business, collects,
                     maintains or possesses, or
                     causes to be collected,
                     maintained or possessed, the
                     personal information of any
                     other person.) Must implement
                     and maintain reasonable
                     procedures and practices
                     appropriate to the nature of the
                     information, and exercise
                     reasonable care to protect the
                     personal information from
                     unauthorized access, use,
                     modification or disclosure.
 
                    Prohibits deceptive and            Kan. Stat. Ann.
                     unconscionable acts in             Sec. Sec.  50-62
                     connection with a consumer         3 through 50-640
                     transaction, regardless of         and 50-675a
                     whether the act occurs before,     through 50-679a
                     during, or after the
                     transaction. Creates private
                     right of action.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Kentucky            8Notification to affected persons  Ky. Rev. Stat.
                     of computer security breach        Ann. 365.7320
                     involving their unencrypted
                     personally identifiable
                     information.
 
                    Personal information security and  Ky. Rev. Stat.
                     breach investigation procedures    Ann. 61.932
                     and practices for certain public
                     agencies and nonaffiliated third
                     parties.
 
                    8Prohibited uses of personally     Ky. Rev. Stat.
                     identifiable student information   Ann. 365.7340
                     by cloud computing service
                     provider
 
                    Department procedures and          Ky. Rev. Stat.
                     regulations, including             Ann. 171.450
                     appropriate procedures to
                     protect against unauthorized
                     access to or use of personal
                     information
 
                    8Prohibits unfair, deceptive, and  Ky. Rev. Stat.
                     unconscionable acts relating to    Ann. Sec. Sec.
                     trade or commerce. Private cause   367.110 through
                     of action only to person who       367.990
                     purchases or leases goods or       (``Consumer
                     services.                          Protection
                                                        Act'')0
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Louisiana           Data security law applies to any   La. Rev. Stat.
                     person that conducts business in   51:3071 to :3077
                     the state or that owns or          (``Database
                     licenses computerized data that    Security Breach
                     includes personal information.     Notification
                     Must implement and maintain        Law'')
                     reasonable security procedures
                     and practices appropriate to the
                     nature of the information to
                     protect the personal information
                     from unauthorized access,
                     destruction, use, modification,
                     or disclosure. Personal
                     information includes name, SSN,
                     driver's license or state ID
                     number, account numbers,
                     passport numbers, or biometric
                     data, but excludes information
                     lawfully made public from
                     federal, state, or local
                     government records.
 
                    8State constitution: ``Every       La. Const. art. I
                     person shall be secure in his      Sec.  50
                     person, property,
                     communications, houses, papers,
                     and effects against unreasonable
                     searches, seizures, or invasions
                     of privacy. No warrant shall
                     issue without probable cause
                     supported by oath or
                     affirmation, and particularly
                     describing the place to be
                     searched, the persons or things
                     to be seized, and the lawful
                     purpose or reason for the
                     search. Any person adversely
                     affected by a search or seizure
                     conducted in violation of this
                     Section shall have standing to
                     raise its illegality in the
                     appropriate court.''
 
                    Prohibits unfair or deceptive      La. Rev. Stat.
                     acts and practices in the          Ann. Sec. Sec.
                     conduct of any trade or            51:1401 to :1420
                     commerce, including advertising.
                     Creates private right of action.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Maine               8Require government websites or    1 M.R.S.A. Sec.
                     state portals to establish and     5420
                     publish privacy policies and
                     procedures
 
                    Prohibits the use of automatic     29-A M.R.S.A.
                     license plate recognition          Sec.  2117-A
                     systems except for certain
                     public safety purposes. Provides
                     that data collected is
                     confidential and may be used
                     only for law enforcement
                     purposes. Data collected may not
                     be stored more than 21 days.
 
                    8Prohibits unfair or deceptive     Me. Rev. Stat.
                     practice in the conduct of any     Ann. tit. 5,
                     trade or commerce, including       Sec. Sec.  205A
                     advertising. Creates private       to 214 (``Unfair
                     right of action for any person     Trade Practices
                     who purchases or leases goods,     Act'')0
                     services, or property as a
                     result of an unlawful practice
                     or act under the law.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Maryland            Data security provisions apply to  Md. Code Com Law
                     businesses and nonaffiliated       Sec. Sec.  14-35
                     third party/service provider.      01 to -3503
                     Must implement and maintain
                     reasonable security procedures
                     and practices appropriate to the
                     nature of the personal
                     information owned or licensed
                     and the nature and size of the
                     business and its operations.
                     Personal information includes
                     name, SSN, driver's license or
                     state ID number, account
                     numbers, TIN, passport number,
                     health information, biometric
                     data, user name or e-mail
                     address in combination with
                     password or security question.
 
                    8Specifies the procedures and      Md. Public Safety
                     protocols that a law enforcement   Code Sec.  3-
                     agency must follow in connection   5090
                     with the operation of an
                     ``automatic license plate reader
                     system'' and ``captured plate
                     data.'' Requires the State
                     Police to adopt procedures to
                     address who has access to the
                     data, training, and create an
                     audit process. Data gathered by
                     an automatic license plate
                     reader system are not subject to
                     disclosure under the Public
                     Information Act.
 
                    Prohibits unfair, abusive, or      Md. Code Ann.,
                     deceptive trade practices,         Com. Law Sec.
                     regardless of whether the          Sec.  13-101 to
                     consumer was in fact misled,       501 (``Consumer
                     deceived, or damage as a result    Protection
                     of the practice. Consumer can      Act'')
                     file a complaint, which the
                     agency will investigate and
                     potentially refer to the FTC
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts       8A person shall have a right       Mass. Gen. Laws
                     against unreasonable,              Ch. 214 Sec.
                     substantial or serious             1B0
                     interference with his privacy.
                     The superior court shall have
                     jurisdiction in equity to
                     enforce such right and in
                     connection therewith to award
                     damages.
 
                    Data security law applies to any   Mass. Gen. Laws
                     person that owns or licenses       Ch. 93H Sec.
                     personal information. Authorizes   2(a)
                     regulations to ensure security
                     and confidentiality of customer
                     information in a manner fully
                     consistent with industry
                     standards. The regulations shall
                     take into account the person's
                     size, scope and type of
                     business, resources available,
                     amount of stored data, and the
                     need for security and
                     confidentiality of both consumer
                     and employee information.
 
                    8Broadly prohibits unfair and      Mass. Gen. Laws
                     deceptive acts and practice sin    Ann. ch. 93A,
                     the conduct of any trade or        Sec. Sec.  1 to
                     commerce. Creates private right    110
                     of action.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Michigan            Preserve personal privacy with     Mich. Comp. Laws
                     respect to the purchase, rental,   Ann. Sec.
                     or borrowing of certain            445.1712
                     materials. Provides penalties
                     and remedies
 
                    8Prohibits unfair,                 Mich. Comp. Laws
                     unconscionable, or deceptive       Sec. Sec.  445.9
                     methods, acts, or practices in     01 to .9220
                     the conduct of trade or
                     commerce. Creates private right
                     of action.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Minnesota           Requires Internet Service          Minn. Stat. Sec.
                     Providers to keep private          Sec.  325M.01 to
                     certain information concerning     .09
                     their customers, unless the
                     customer gives permission to
                     disclose the information.
                     Prohibit disclosure of
                     personally identifying
                     information, and requires ISPs
                     to get permission from
                     subscribers before disclosing
                     information about the
                     subscribers' online surfing
                     habits and Internet sites
                     visited.
 
                    8Require government websites or    Minn. Stat. Sec.
                     state portals to establish and     13.150
                     publish privacy policies and
                     procedures.
 
                    Makes a misdemeanor to publish or  Minn. Stat. Ann.
                     disseminate of advertisements      Sec.  325F.67
                     which contain any material
                     assertion, representation, or
                     statement of fact which is
                     untrue, deceptive, or misleading
 
                    8Prohibits act, use, or            Minn. Stat. Sec.
                     employment by any person of any    Sec.  325F.680
                     fraud, false pretense,
                     misleading statement, or
                     deceptive practice, with the
                     intent that others rely on it in
                     the sale of any merchandise
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mississippi         Data security law that applies to  Miss. Code Ann.
                     any person who conducts business   Sec.  75-24-29
                     in the state and in the ordinary
                     course of business. Personal
                     information includes name, SSN,
                     driver's license or state ID
                     number, or financial account
                     numbers
 
                    8Broadly prohibits unfair and      Miss. Code Ann.
                     deceptive practices as long as     Sec. Sec.  75-24
                     they are in or affecting           -1 to -270
                     commerce. Only attorney general
                     can enforce the prohibitions.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Missouri            Defines ``E-book'' and ``digital   Mo. Rev. Stat.
                     resource or material'' and adds    Sec.  182.815,
                     them to the items specified in     182.817
                     the definition of ``library
                     material'' that a library patron
                     may use, borrow, or request.
                     Provides that any third party
                     contracted by a library that
                     receives, transmits, maintains,
                     or stores a library record may
                     not release or disclose all or a
                     portion of a library record to
                     anyone except the person
                     identified in the record or by a
                     court order.
 
                    8Prohibits unfair or deceptive     Mo. Rev. Stat.
                     trade practices or omissions in    Sec. Sec.  407.0
                     connection with the sale or        10 to -.307
                     advertisement of merchandise in    (``Merchandising
                     trade or commerce, whether the     Practices
                     act was committed before,          Act'')0
                     during, or after the sale,
                     advertisement, or solicitation.
                     Any person who purchases or
                     leases merchandise and suffers
                     loss as a result of the unlawful
                     act may bring a civil action
Montana             Require government website or      Mont. Code Ann.
                     state portals to establish and     Sec.  2-17-550
                     publish privacy policies and       to -553
                     procedures. Allows sale and
                     disclosure to third parties,
                     provided notice and consent.
 
                    8State constitution: The right of  Mont. Const. art.
                     individual privacy is essential    II Sec.  100
                     to the well-being of a free
                     society and shall not be
                     infringed without the showing of
                     a compelling state interest.
 
                    Prohibits methods of competition   Mont. Code Ann.
                     and unfair or deceptive acts or    Sec. Sec.  30-14
                     practices in the conduct of any    -101 to -142
                     trade or commerce.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Nebraska            8Data security law applies to any  Neb. Rev. Stat.
                     individual or commercial entity    Sec. Sec.  87-80
                     that conducts business in          1 to -8070
                     Nebraska and maintains personal
                     information about Nebraska
                     residents. Must establish and
                     maintain reasonable security
                     processes and practices
                     appropriate to the nature of the
                     personal information maintained.
                     Ensure that all third parties to
                     whom the entity provides
                     sensitive personal information
                     establish and maintain
                     reasonable security processes
                     and practices appropriate to the
                     nature of the personal
                     information maintained.
 
                    Prohibits employers from           Neb. Rev. Stat.
                     accessing an applicant or an       Sec. Sec.  48-35
                     employee's personal Internet       01 to 48-3511
                     accounts and taking adverse        (Workplace
                     action against an employee or      Privacy Act)
                     applicant for failure to provide
                     any information related to the
                     account; prohibits retaliation
                     against an employee who files a
                     complaint under the Act;
                     prohibits an employee from
                     downloading or transferring any
                     private proprietary information
                     or financial data to a personal
                     Internet account without
                     authorization.
 
                    8Requires any governmental entity  Neb. Rev. Stat.
                     that uses an automatic license     Sec.  60-3201 to
                     plate reader (ALPR) system to      32090
                     adopt a policy governing use of
                     the system. Governmental
                     entities also must adopt a
                     privacy policy to ensure that
                     captured plate data is not
                     shared in violation of this act
                     or any other law. The policies
                     must be posted on the Internet
                     or at the entity's main office.
                     Requires annual reports to the
                     Nebraska Commission on Law
                     Enforcement and Criminal Justice
                     on ALPR practices and usage.
                     Provides that captured plate
                     data is not considered a public
                     record.
 
                    Broadly prohibits unfair or        Neb. Rev. Stat.
                     deceptive trade practices in the   Sec. Sec.  59-16
                     conduct of any trade or            01 to -1623
                     commerce. Creates private right
                     of action.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Nevada              8Requires operators of Internet    Nev. Rev. Stat.
                     websites or online services that   Sec.  603A.3400
                     collect personally identifiable
                     information from residents of
                     the state to notify consumers
                     about how that information is
                     used.
 
                    Require Internet Service           Nev. Rev. Stat.
                     Providers to keep private          Sec.  205.498
                     certain information concerning
                     their customers, unless the
                     customer gives permission to
                     disclose the information.
 
                    8Data security. Applies to data    Nev. Rev. Stat.
                     collector that maintains records   Sec. Sec.  603A.
                     which contain personal             210, 603A.2150
                     information and third parties to
                     whom they disclose. Must
                     implement and maintain
                     reasonable security measures
 
                    Prohibits deceptive trade          Nev. Rev. Stat.
                     practices, including knowingly     Sec. Sec.  598.0
                     making any other false             903 to .0999
                     representation in the course of
                     a business or occupation. Also
                     prohibits failing to disclose
                     material fact in connection with
                     sale or lease of goods or
                     services. Private right of
                     action created under Nev. Rev.
                     Stat. Sec.  41.600.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
New Hampshire       8Prohibits government officials    N.H. Rev. Stat.
                     from obtaining access to           Sec.  359-C:40
                     customer financial or credit
                     records, or the information they
                     contain, held by financial
                     institutions or creditors
                     without the customer's
                     authorization, an administrative
                     subpoena, a search warrant, or a
                     judicial subpoena
 
                    Makes a crime to willfully         N.H. Rev. Stat.
                     intercept any telecommunication    Sec.  570-A:2 to
                     or oral communication without      A:2-a
                     the consent of all parties to
                     the communication. It is
                     unlawful to willfully use an
                     electronic, mechanical, or other
                     device to intercept an oral
                     communication or to disclose the
                     contents of an intercepted
                     communication. Law enforcement
                     needs warrant, exception to
                     warrant, or consent to use cell
                     site simulators.
 
                    8State constitution: An            N.H. Const. Pt.
                     individual's right to live free    1, art. II0
                     from governmental intrusion in
                     private or personal information
                     is natural, essential, and
                     inherent.
 
                    Broadly prohibits unfair method    N.H. Rev. Stat.
                     of competition or any unfair or    Sec. Sec.  358-A
                     deceptive practice in the          :1 to -A:13
                     conduct of any trade or commerce
                     within the state. Creates
                     private right of action.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
New Jersey          8Prohibits act, use, or            N.J. Stat. Ann.
                     employment by any person of any    Sec. Sec.  56:8-
                     unconscionable commercial          1 to -910
                     practice, deception, fraud,
                     misrepresentation, or the
                     knowing concealment,
                     suppression, or omission of any
                     material fact with the intent
                     that others rely upon it in
                     connection with the sale or
                     advertisement of any merchandise
                     or real estate. Creates private
                     right of action.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
New Mexico          Data security law applies to a     N.M. Stat. Sec.
                     person that owns or licenses       57-12C-4, to 12C-
                     personal identifying information   5
                     of a New Mexico resident. Must
                     implement and maintain
                     reasonable security procedures
                     and practices appropriate to the
                     nature of the information to
                     protect the personal identifying
                     information from unauthorized
                     access, destruction, use,
                     modification or disclosure.
 
                    8Prohibits unfair,                 N.M. Stat. Sec.
                     unconscionable, and deceptive      Sec.  57-12-1 to
                     practices involving goods,         -22 (``Unfair
                     services, credit, or debt          Practices
                     collection, made in the course     Act'')0
                     of the person's trade or
                     commerce. Private right of
                     action.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
New York            Require government Websites or     N.Y. State Tech.
                     state portals to establish and     Law Sec.  201 to
                     publish privacy policies and       207
                     procedures
 
                    8Prohibits deceptive acts in the   N.Y. Exec. Law
                     conduct of any business, trade,    Sec.  63(12);
                     or commerce or service. Only       N.Y. Gen. Bus.
                     attorney general can enforce       Law Sec. Sec.
                     prohibitions on repeated           349 and 3500
                     fraudulent acts or
                     unconscionable contract
                     provisions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
North Carolina      Requires state or local law        N.C. Gen. Stat.
                     enforcement agencies to adopt a    Sec. Sec.  20-18
                     written policy governing the use   3.30 to .32
                     of an ALPR system that addresses
                     databases used to compare data
                     obtained by the system, data
                     retention and sharing of data
                     with other law enforcement
                     agencies, system operator
                     training, supervision of system
                     use, and data security and
                     access. Requires audits and
                     reports of system use and
                     effectiveness. Limits retention
                     of ALPR data to no more than 90
                     days, except in specified
                     circumstances. Provides that
                     data obtained by the system is
                     confidential and not a public
                     record.
 
                    8Prohibits unfair methods of       N.C. Gen. Stat.
                     competition, and unfair or         Sec. Sec.  75-1.
                     deceptive acts or practices in     1 to -350
                     or affecting business
                     activities. Creates private
                     right of action
------------------------------------------------------------------------
North Dakota        Prohibits an act, use, or          N.D. Cent. Code
                     employment of any deceptive act    Sec. Sec.  51-15
                     or practice, fraud, or             -01 to -11
                     misrepresentation, with the
                     intent that others rely thereon
                     in connection with the sale or
                     advertisement of any
                     merchandise. Acts or
                     advertisements which causes or
                     is likely to cause substantial
                     injury to a person and not
                     reasonably avoidable by the
                     injured person and not
                     outweighed by countervailing
                     benefits to consumers or to
                     competition, is declared to be
                     an unlawful practice. Creates
                     private right of action.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ohio                8Data security law that applies    Ohio Rev. Code
                     to Business or nonprofit entity    Ann. Sec.
                     that accesses, maintains,          1354.01 to
                     communicates, or handles           1354.050
                     personal information or
                     restricted information. To
                     qualify for an affirmative
                     defense to a cause of action
                     alleging a failure to implement
                     reasonable information security
                     controls resulting in a data
                     breach, an entity must create,
                     maintain, and comply with a
                     written cybersecurity program
                     that contains administrative,
                     technical, and physical
                     safeguards for the protection of
                     personal information
 
                    Prohibits unfair, unconscionable,  Ohio Rev. Code
                     or deceptive trade practices in    Ann. Sec. Sec.
                     connection with a consumer         1345.01 to .13
                     transaction, regardless of
                     whether the act occurs before,
                     during, or after the
                     transaction.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Oklahoma            8Requires public reporting of      70 Okl. Stat.
                     which student data are collected   Ann. Sec.  3-168
                     by the state, mandates creation    (Student Data
                     of a statewide student data        Accessibility,
                     security plan, and limits the      Transparency and
                     data that can be collected on      Accountability
                     individual students and how that   Act)0
                     data can be shared. It
                     establishes new limits on the
                     transfer of student data to
                     federal, state, or local
                     agencies and organizations
                     outside Oklahoma
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Oregon              Data security law that applies to  Or. Rev. Stat
                     any person that owns, maintains,   Sec.  646A.622
                     or otherwise possesses data that
                     includes a consumer's personal
                     information that is used in the
                     course of the person's business,
                     vocation, occupation or
                     volunteer activities. Must
                     develop, implement, and maintain
                     reasonable safeguards to protect
                     the security, confidentiality,
                     and integrity of the personal
                     information, including disposal
                     of the data
 
                    8Prohibits unconscionable tactics  Or. Rev. Stat.
                     and other unfair or deceptive      Sec. Sec.  646.6
                     conduct in trade commerce.         05 through
                     Consumer can challenge unfair or   646.6560
                     deceptive conduct only after the
                     Attorney General has first
                     established a rule declaring
                     that conduct to be unfair or
                     deceptive.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pennsylvania        Prohibits unfair or deceptive      73 Pa. Stat. Ann.
                     practices in the conduct of any    Sec. Sec.  201-1
                     trade or commerce. Creates         through 201-9.3
                     private right of action.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rhode Island        8Data security measure applies to  R.I. Gen. Laws
                     a business that owns or licenses   Sec.  11-49.3-20
                     computerized unencrypted
                     personal information & a
                     nonaffiliated third-party
                     contractor. Must implement and
                     maintain a risk-based
                     information security program
                     with reasonable security
                     procedures and practices
                     appropriate to the nature of the
                     information.
 
                    Prohibits unfair or deceptive      R.I. Gen. Laws
                     practices in the conduct of any    Sec. Sec.  6-13.
                     trade or commerce. Creates         1-1 through 6-
                     private right of action.           13.1-27
------------------------------------------------------------------------
South Carolina      8Requires government Websites or   S.C. Code Ann.
                     state portals to establish and     Sec.  30-2-400
                     publish privacy policies and
                     procedures
 
                    Data security law that applies to  S.C. Code Sec.
                     a person licensed, authorized to   38-99-10 to -
                     operate, or registered, or         100.
                     required to be licensed,
                     authorized, or registered
                     pursuant to the insurance laws
                     of the state. Requires a
                     licensee to develop, implement
                     and maintain a comprehensive
                     information security program
                     based on the licensee's risk
                     assessment. Establishes
                     requirements for the security
                     program, such as implementing an
                     incident response plan and other
                     details
 
                    8State constitution: The right of  S.C. Const. art.
                     the people to be secure in their   I, Sec.  100
                     persons, houses, papers, and
                     effects against unreasonable
                     searches and seizures and
                     unreasonable invasions of
                     privacy shall not be violated,
                     and no warrants shall issue but
                     upon probable cause, supported
                     by oath or affirmation, and
                     particularly describing the
                     place to be searched, the person
                     or thing to be seized, and the
                     information to be obtained.
 
                    Prohibits unfair or deceptive      S.C. Code Ann.
                     practices in the conduct of any    Sec. Sec.  39-5-
                     trade or commerce. Creates         10 through 39-5-
                     private right of action.           160
------------------------------------------------------------------------
South Dakota        8Prohibits knowing and             S.D. Codified
                     intentional deceptive acts in      Laws Sec. Sec.
                     connection with the sale or        37-24-1 through
                     advertisement of merchandise       37-24-35,
                                                        amended by 2019
                                                        South Dakota
                                                        Laws Ch. 177 (SB
                                                        20)0
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tennessee           Requires the state or any agency,  Tenn. Code Sec.
                     institution, or political          10-7-512
                     subdivision thereof that
                     operates or maintains an
                     electronic mail communications
                     system to adopt a written policy
                     on any monitoring of electronic
                     mail communications and the
                     circumstances under which it
                     will be conducted. The policy
                     shall include a statement that
                     correspondence may be a public
                     record under the public records
                     law and may be subject to public
                     inspection under this part.
 
                    8Provides that any captured        Tenn. Code Sec.
                     automatic license plate data       55-10-3020
                     collected by a government entity
                     may not be stored for more than
                     90 days unless they are part of
                     an ongoing investigation, and in
                     that case provides for data to
                     be destroyed after the
                     conclusion of the investigation.
 
                    Prohibits specific unfair or       Tenn. Code Ann.
                     deceptive acts or practices        Sec. Sec.  47-18
                     limited to those enumerated        -101 through 47-
                     which affect the conduct of any    18-125
                     trade or commerce. Only attorney
                     general can bring an enforcement
                     action.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Texas               8Data security measure that        Tex. Bus. & Com.
                     applies to a business or           Code Sec.
                     association that collects or       521.0520
                     maintains sensitive personal
                     information. (Does not apply to
                     financial institutions).
                     Requires implementation of
                     reasonable procedures, including
                     taking any appropriate
                     corrective action.
 
                    Prohibits false, unconscionable    Tex. Bus. & Com.
                     and deceptive acts in the          Code Ann. Sec.
                     conduct of any trade or            Sec.  17.41
                     commerce. Consumer protection      through 17.63
                     division can enforce
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Utah                8Require all nonfinancial          Utah Code Ann.
                     businesses to disclose to          Sec. Sec.  13-37
                     customers, in writing or by        -201 to -2030
                     electronic mail, the types of
                     personal information the
                     business shares with or sells to
                     a third party for direct
                     marketing purposes or for
                     compensation. Provides a private
                     right of action
 
                    Requires government websites or    Utah Code Ann.
                     state portals to establish         Sec.  63D-2-101,
                     privacy policies and procedures    to -104
 
                    8Data security. Applies to any     Utah Code Ann.
                     person who conducts business in    Sec. Sec.  13-44
                     the state and maintains personal   -101, -201, 3010
                     information. Must implement and
                     maintain reasonable procedures.
                     Amended in 2019 to define is
                     subject to a civil penalty
 
                    Captured license plate data are a  Utah Code Ann.
                     protected record if the captured   Sec. Sec.  41-6a-
                     plate data are maintained by a     2001 to -2005
                     governmental entity. Provides
                     that captured plate data may
                     only be shared for specified
                     purposes, may only be preserved
                     for a certain time, and may only
                     be disclosed pursuant to
                     specific circumstances such as a
                     disclosure order or a warrant.
                     Government entities may not use
                     privately held captured plate
                     data without a warrant or court
                     order, unless the private
                     provider retains captured plate
                     data for 30 days or fewer.
 
                    8Prohibits deceptive and           Utah Code Ann.
                     unconscionable acts or practices   Sec. Sec.  13-11
                     by suppliers in connection with    -1 through 13-11-
                     a consumer transaction,            230
                     regardless of whether it occurs
                     before, during, or after the
                     transaction. Private right of
                     action.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Vermont             Prevents employers from            21 V.S.A. Sec.
                     requesting passwords to personal   495
                     Internet accounts to get or keep
                     a job.
 
                    8Data security. Applies to Data    9 V.S.A Sec.
                     brokers--businesses that           2446-24470
                     knowingly collect and license
                     the personal information of
                     consumers with whom such
                     businesses do not have a direct
                     relationship. Must implement and
                     maintain a written information
                     security program containing
                     administrative, technical, and
                     physical safeguards to protect
                     personally identifiable
                     information.
 
                    Broadly prohibits unfair or        9 V.S.A. Sec.
                     deceptive acts or practices in     Sec.  2451 to
                     commerce                           2480g
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Virginia            8Require government websites or    Va. Code Sec.
                     state portals to establish and     2.2-38000
                     publish privacy policies and
                     procedures
 
                    Prohibits specified fraudulent     Va. Code Ann.
                     and deceptive acts and practices   Sec. Sec.  59.1-
                     committed by a supplier in         196 through 59.1-
                     connection with a consumer         207
                     transaction.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Washington          8State constitution: No person     Wash. Const. art.
                     shall be disturbed in his          I, Sec.  70
                     private affairs, or his home
                     invaded, without authority of
                     law
 
                    Prohibits unfair methods of        Wash. Rev. Code
                     competition and unfair or          Sec. Sec.  19.86
                     deceptive acts or practices in     .010 through
                     the conduct of any trade or        19.86.920
                     commerce. Private right of
                     action.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
West Virginia       8Student data law governing use    W. Va. Code, Sec.
                     sharing of student privacy          18-2-5h0
                     rights, and notification of
                     transfer of confidential
                     information.
 
                    Prohibits unfair methods of        W. Va. Code Sec.
                     competition and unfair or          Sec.  46A-6-101
                     deceptive acts or practices in     through 46A-6-
                     the conduct of any trade or        110
                     commerce. Private right of
                     action.
------------------------------------------------------------------------


    The Chairman. Well, thank you very, very much.
    And we will now proceed to questions. Mr. Polonetsky, let 
me begin with you. And I referred to this in my opening 
statement.
    Both the GDPR and the CCPA are written to give consumers 
more control over their data by establishing certain rights. 
These rights include the right to access, right to erasure or 
deletion, right to data portability, and others.
    I mentioned in my opening statement a concern that these 
rights may inadvertently decrease privacy for consumers because 
companies may be compelled to retain, track, or re-identify 
data that they would otherwise have discarded. So if you would 
comment about that and then I will ask the others if they have 
got any observations.
    Mr. Polonetsky. I think we can effectively provide people 
strong rights of access and deletion if we carefully make it 
clear that we are not going to be requiring companies to do 
more tracking in order to be able to provide that data. 
Certainly GDPR goes in that direction. I think it is solvable 
by making it clear that you need to know who you are providing 
data to. You need to clearly verify so that you are providing 
the data to the person and not creating an opportunity for data 
breaches. But I think carefully crafting the right in a way 
that gives us those protections is quite feasible.
    The Chairman. Is that a problem that has been experienced 
under GDPR? I just did not understand exactly what you were 
saying there.
    Mr. Polonetsky. GDPR certainly makes it clear that you are 
not obligated to do extra tracking in order to have the data to 
provide back to people. I think there have been some concerns, 
since the CCPA is new, in exactly what it means to verify 
somebody is not quite clear. So people are looking for 
guidance. I think one of the reasons I argue this committee 
should act and, indeed, override CCPA is we can fix some of 
those areas where there is clarity so that people have a strong 
right of access and we do not create any over-disclosure by 
providing those deletion rights that we want to provide.
    The Chairman. OK.
    Mr. Steyer.
    Mr. Steyer. So thanks, Mr. Chairman. A couple of things.
    One, in California a few years ago, we passed a bill called 
The Eraser Button, and the point was you could erase---kids 
under 18 could have erased any content that they had foolishly 
posted without thinking about it. We think that that idea is 
something that should also be part of a broader Federal law.
    The issue has actually been the enforcement. So my 
colleague on my left mentioned the enforcement issues. That has 
been the biggest issue around the erasure issue. And actually I 
am sure that Ms. Dixon knows that because there is a right in 
Europe to be forgotten. So this is a very important thing that 
the Committee should do.
    The second thing I would mention off of what Jules just 
said is that data minimization, which for, again, a luddite, 
simpleminded person like me means that you only should use the 
data for what you really need it for, you should not be able to 
use data broadly for multiple purposes, is another critically 
important element of what a Federal privacy law should have. 
And that was the toughest part for us to actually hold onto in 
California. That is the piece of the CCPA that if you could do 
it over again or make it stronger, you would have stronger data 
minimization.
    So those are the two items I would mention, Mr. Chairman.
    The Chairman. Ms. Guliani.
    Ms. Guliani. I mean, I think absolutely. I mean, the 
average consumer does not know what data is being collected on 
them and does not necessarily know how to make sure that that 
data is accurate or to request deletion. So that is something 
that can certainly be accomplished while accommodating, I 
think, the interests of not wanting to encourage businesses to 
retain more information.
    I will note that the right to be forgotten is not something 
that we would want to be adopted identically in the U.S. There 
are potential First Amendment considerations. For example, we 
would not want an individual to be able to request that a 
newspaper published an article about them that was disparaging 
take down that content. So there might need to be some 
modifications from GDPR to be consistent with the U.S. 
Constitution.
    The Chairman. Thank you.
    Ms. Dixon, let me shift just in the few moments I have 
left. There is information that after the GDPR went into 
effect, a number of small businesses had to shut down because 
they simply could not afford to comply. Is that a concern, and 
what do you say to that? And what advice do you have for this 
Congress?
    Ms. Dixon. I mentioned earlier, Chairman, that the tasks of 
data protection authorities in the EU are broad, and one of our 
key tasks in advance of GDPR was to prepare industry and in 
particular SMEs and micro-enterprises. And in doing so, we 
heard a lot of concerns from smaller companies about their 
ability to comply with what is a vast and sometimes technical 
and complex law.
    However, through the awareness campaign that we rolled out 
and the very specific guidance we were able to issue to smaller 
enterprises, we were able to clarify the risk-based approach 
that the GDPR endorses, in other words, that organizations only 
need to implement what are called the organizational and 
technical measures appropriate to the levels of risk in the 
scale of personal data processing that they are undertaking.
    So, in fact, the GDPR does consider smaller enterprises. 
Some very specific articles in the GDPR, like article 30, the 
requirement to document data processing operations--it 
recognizes that smaller scale enterprises do not need to 
conduct that particular exercise.
    So I think for every organization, the GDPR is a win-win 
when it is implemented. It engenders the trust of consumers. It 
protects organizations. And we have not seen any direct 
evidence of organizations having to shut down because they 
could not meet the compliance burden once they understood how 
they could practically implement it.
    The Chairman. Thank you.
    Senator Cantwell.
    Senator Cantwell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Again, thank you, everybody, for your testimony.
    Ms. Guliani, it is good to hear from you and Mr. Steyer 
about the California law and its need for improvements. I can 
guarantee you one of the first calls I made when taking over 
this spot was to Attorney General Becerra, a former colleague, 
to ask him about the California law. And he said basically what 
you articulated, Ms. Guliani, that it needs improvement and 
that he sought to seek that.
    So I wondered--Ms. Guliani, you were very clear on the 
discriminatory practices in housing and employment, race and 
gender issues that are being deployed. To your point of people 
not even knowing how the information is used and collected, who 
do you think is the repository for all of these violations that 
are existing today? Do you think we get that from you, the AGs? 
Like who do you think has the running list of duplicitous 
actions that are being used against people with their data?
    Ms. Guliani. I do not think anybody has a running list, 
which is why I think it is so important that we have robust 
enforcement on multiple levels. So we need the FTC to be 
resourced and have the technical expertise. They should also be 
able to level civil penalties.
    But at the same time, I think we want to take advantage of 
State attorneys general and regulatory agencies who have a long 
history of protecting consumers.
    And finally, I think consumers have to have the right to go 
to court themselves. I mean, there may be many cases where 
either State or Federal authorities do not have the resources 
and so, for good reason, cannot follow up on a privacy 
violation.
    I think without a multi-pronged approach from an 
enforcement standpoint what you will effectively have are gaps 
and gaps that can be exploited.
    Senator Cantwell. Well, I think to the issues that you 
mentioned, these are things that we batted down in other areas 
of the law. So to see them pop up online would be really just 
an undermining of current Federal law. So that is why it is so 
important that we fight against it to make sure that the online 
world meets the same standard as broadcasters have to meet in 
the broadcast world or health care officials have to meet in 
other forms of health care. We do not allow those things to pop 
up.
    I think the one thing that we learned from the Facebook 
hearing or Facebook writ large is just that anytime you see a 
survey online, chances are that information is just a data 
collection source so that some information can be used against 
you. Or when you have that familiar do you want a call back 
from somebody on the service is really a can I sell your name 
to someone else who is going to then try to solicit something 
from you.
    So I think it is very important that we get a handle on 
these current privacy violations so that the public has a 
better understanding.
    To this point about the erasing of data, one thing that we 
have learned from our privacy law that we passed through this 
Committee on clearing your good name, which was a tool by which 
we gave those who were victims of identity theft the ability to 
get a claim through the FTC and basically present that to law 
enforcement that they were the victim, not the perpetrator of 
the crime. How do you see enforcement working on something like 
that? Because to me, it is a very big challenge to have--you 
know, the standard which we are operating now is basically 
people call attorney generals and attorney generals basically 
prosecute these people and get them shut down. Really, that is 
what happens. Consumers call in and complain.
    And so in this case, there is a lot data and information 
being used and they do not even know how it is being used and 
they do not even know that they are, as you said, on housing or 
loans being discriminated against.
    Ms. Guliani. Yes. I mean, I think that you really touch an 
important point, and one is that it is hard to figure out when 
a privacy violation has occurred or discriminatory conduct has 
occurred. I mean, just think about discriminatory advertising. 
I do not know the ads I have not seen, and so how do I know 
that I have been denied the opportunity for, let us say, an 
employment opportunity because I am a woman or a person of 
color. And so I think that it is really important that, one, 
the standards be clear so that companies know the rules of the 
road and, two, that the enforcement entities need to be looking 
at those companies, following up on those complaints when they 
get phone calls, having the resources to do that.
    But I think another thing that we also should look at is 
especially with algorithms and machine learning, more 
transparency, you know, companies allowing outside researchers 
to look at their algorithms and say, hey, this is having a 
disparate impact or this is having a discriminatory effect. And 
so we should really be encouraging those types of behaviors and 
encouraging companies to do risk assessments to measure 
potential discrimination.
    Senator Cantwell. But just to be clear, you think that 
these companies should face the same penalties as other 
companies who have violated the law that is already in 
existence?
    Ms. Guliani. Exactly. Self-regulation is not working and 
there should be robust enforcement.
    Senator Cantwell. Thank you.
    The Chairman. Thank you very much.
    Senator Blunt.

                 STATEMENT OF HON. ROY BLUNT, 
                   U.S. SENATOR FROM MISSOURI

    Senator Blunt. Thank you, Chairman.
    Ms. Dixon, you mentioned in your testimony that the Irish 
Data Protection Commission is the lead supervisory authority in 
the EU for a significant number of U.S. companies because of 
domicile and other things. I do not want you to name companies, 
but are there U.S. companies, 11 months now into the 
implementation of this, that are noncompliant with the GDPR?
    Ms. Dixon. Thank you, Senator.
    In the 11 months since the GDPR came into application, we 
have opened 17 significant investigations into potential 
infringement by the large U.S. tech companies. So we have 
reason to believe then clearly that there are potential 
infringements of the GDPR arising. And we are significantly 
advanced in a number of those investigations and intend to 
bring a decision and an outcome on those investigations----
    Senator Blunt. Do you have similar investigations with EU-
based companies?
    Ms. Dixon. We do. So overall, we have 51 significant 
investigations underway currently. So a subset relate to the 
U.S. tech companies. We supervise government and public sector 
also in Ireland in addition to commercial enterprises. So it is 
across the board.
    Senator Blunt. So it is safe to assume that in the regime 
that has been put in place, that U.S. companies do not have a 
more difficult time or an easier time, either one, than EU 
companies in complying?
    Ms. Dixon. I think it is not a case of a more difficult or 
easier compliance approach. It is a risk-based approach that 
the GDPR endorses. And so when you have platforms that have 
billions of users in some cases and certainly hundreds of 
millions of EU persons as users, the risks are potentially 
higher in terms of the issues that arise around breaches and 
noncompliance with the principles.
    Senator Blunt. And both EU companies and U.S. companies are 
being fined for noncompliance?
    Ms. Dixon. We will have to conclude the investigations 
and----
    Senator Blunt. Before the penalty?
    So have you issued any fines up till now?
    Ms. Dixon. The investigations have not yet concluded, the 
first tranche that we have underway.
    Senator Blunt. All right. Thank you.
    Mr. Polonetsky, Senator Schatz and I have some legislation 
on facial recognition, thinking that also is a significant data 
that uniquely recognizes people, obviously. I think we both 
agree that that information collected through facial 
recognition needs to be treated like all other personal data.
    Can you share your perspective on how Congress should 
define personally identified information, whether that should 
include facial recognition and how we would treat that in a way 
similar or unlike other commercially collected data?
    Mr. Polonetsky. I would argue that a bill should recognize 
that there are special categories, sensitive categories of 
information, and the typical default for collecting, using, 
sharing that information should be a strong consent-based 
model. There may be places where we can see opt out or default. 
But certainly when it comes to sensitive data, biometric data, 
DNA, facial prints, fingerprints are clearly sensitive data and 
should be subject to a stronger consent-based standard.
    Senator Blunt. Are there best practices out there yet?
    Mr. Polonetsky. We have done a fairly detailed set of best 
practices as we have seen these technologies in the market. 
What we try to do is differentiate between facial recognition, 
which I think we all know, recognizing my unique ID, creating a 
template, and then perhaps facial detection. How many heads are 
in this space? How many male or female heads? I certainly can 
see potential for discrimination if I treat people differently, 
but I do not have a unique identification. And so in our 
structure, we set up a tier. If a business just wants to know 
how many people are in the room, unique numbers of people, that 
might be a notice and a way to opt out, but if I am going to 
identify you by your name, the default ought to be that I need 
your permission.
    Senator Blunt. And, Mr. Steyer, I think you were at the 
meeting the other day the Senator and I had on the CAMRA Act.
    Mr. Steyer. Right.
    Senator Blunt. Is there a facial recognition element there 
or concern about kids on screens?
    Mr. Steyer. There should be.
    And by the way, thank you very much for supporting the 
CAMRA Act because I think this is really an issue that is a big 
deal for everybody because we get it. Your personally 
identifiable information is really, really important.
    The one thing I would say I differ with Mr. Polonetsky on 
is the California law basically does not differentiate between 
types of data. It just says all data deserve strong protection. 
And one thing I would urge the Committee to think about is look 
how California treated data. We did not actually distinguish. 
And Mr. Polonetsky wrote thoughtful comments for this hearing. 
But we think basically all data that is your personal data is 
really important. Obviously, stuff like facial recognition 
matters a lot to all of us because we understand it. We think 
all data matters.
    Senator Blunt. Thank you, and Senator Markey and I are 
working on the screen time, face time element of that 
particularly as it relates to kids.
    Mr. Steyer. And thank you for doing that very much.
    Senator Blunt. Thank you, Chairman.
    The Chairman. And thank you.
    Senator Schatz.

                STATEMENT OF HON. BRIAN SCHATZ, 
                    U.S. SENATOR FROM HAWAII

    Senator Schatz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Thank you for the testimonies. We have had a constructive 
conversation.
    I want to start with the FTC. My view is that any law ought 
to have--and this is for Mr. Steyer and Ms. Guliani--first fine 
authority and APA rulemaking authority. And I just want to get 
your view on whether you agree with that? Mr. Steyer.
    Mr. Steyer. I completely agree with that. I mean, if you 
really look at it in a practical common sense way--and Attorney 
General Becerra you guys were referring to who was angry at me 
because we passed a law--because he is my law school classmate 
and friend said, ``Oh, my God, now I became the Chief Privacy 
Officer in California.''
    The big issue is resources for enforcement. You could speak 
to Attorney General Becerra.
    Senator Schatz. I will get to that, sir. It is a yes.
    Mr. Steyer. Yes, definitely to your question.
    Ms. Guliani. Yes, definitely.
    Senator Schatz. And let us talk about resources for 
enforcement. So the Ireland DPA has 135 employees. They are 
about one and a half percent of the U.S. population. The FTC 
has, obviously, more employees, but as it relates to--full-time 
privacy staff has 40.
    Do we need more human beings at the FTC devoted to privacy?
    Mr. Steyer. Yes, absolutely. No brainer.
    Ms. Guliani. Yes, absolutely and increase technical 
expertise. I think as you note, the size of the FTC is probably 
smaller than the DC office of a lot of major tech companies.
    Senator Schatz. That is a fair point. OK.
    Let me go back to transparency and control. I have been 
banging this drum for a while. I am great with transparency and 
control. I just do not think it is enough. And as we think 
about Senator Blunt and I working on facial recognition, you 
are going to walk into a mall and this idea that there will be 
sensors everywhere and they will be pinging off of your face. 
And then let us say we pass a pretty robust transparency and 
control regime. I am not sure how you can effectuate a 
transparency and control regime if your phone is not constantly 
giving you a notification and having you make individual micro-
decisions about whether Banana Republic is going to send you a 
message or the Apple store or whatever. Or, heaven forbid, but 
what happens if you did not bring your phone into the mall? How 
do you even say no to some of this data collection?
    It seems to me that we do need belt and suspenders, that we 
ought to be able to turn the dials on some of these decisions. 
But we also need to recognize the impracticability in an IoT 
universe of transparency and control of giving any real 
control. I mean, to Chairman Wicker's point in his opening 
statement, is that really a choice.
    I am wondering, Mr. Steyer and then Ms. Guliani, how much 
of this do you think can be accomplished through transparency 
and control, and how much of this do you think ought to be 
backed up with a principle of, listen, we are going to 
configure a statute best we can, but in order to future-proof 
this and in order to back this thing up, we have to have a 
basic principle in the law which says you may not harm people 
with the data that you collect? Mr. Steyer.
    Mr. Steyer. I completely agree with you. You could have 
written my remarks. I agree with you. Transparency and control 
are important, but they are simply not enough by themselves.
    And we talked about the rights to access, to delete, to 
port your information. And certain acts should be completely 
off limits like behavioral ads targeting kids. So transparency 
and control are important, but they are simply not enough. 
Notice and consent, sort of broad terms like that, just are not 
enough. We have to go farther. And we think that the public 
would love you to do that.
    Senator Schatz. Ms. Guliani.
    Ms. Guliani. I think you are absolutely right. Notice and 
consent is not enough in part because in a lot cases people do 
not have meaningful choices. If the option is between not 
having a service at all or turning over massive amounts of 
data, a lot of consumers consent, but it is not really consent. 
So I think that the law should place strict guardrails on what 
companies can and cannot do. For example, if I have a 
flashlight app, is it really reasonable for that app to require 
me to turn over all of my location data or my financial data 
just as a condition of using that app? I would say no.
    And in the face recognition context, you know, if I want to 
go to the grocery store to buy food, is it really reasonable 
that the only option I have is a sign that notifies me that 
face recognition technology is being used? I do not think that 
that is really the control and the right that consumers want. 
And so absolutely we have to go beyond notice and consent to 
get at sort of terms that really take advantage of people's 
privacy and exploit their lack of choice.
    Senator Schatz. My final question--and this will be for the 
record and for the entire panel--is whether or not we are 
missing anything in terms of essential elements of a Federal 
data privacy law? And I will take that for the record. Thank 
you.
    The Chairman. That is a very good question, and so I hope 
all of our panelists will take that for the record and you have 
a few days to respond. That would be very helpful.
    Senator Fischer.

                STATEMENT OF HON. DEB FISCHER, 
                   U.S. SENATOR FROM NEBRASKA

    Senator Fischer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    One core part of the GDPR is to protect consumer data by 
requiring freely given, specific and informed consent. However, 
we already are seeing user interface workarounds that we can 
consent by confusing user choice. Ms. Guliani, you just spoke 
to that in the answer to Senator Schatz's question.
    In these circumstances, users see a false choice or a 
simple escape route through the ``I agree'' button or ``okay'' 
button that pops up on our screen. And this can hide what the 
action actually does, such as accessing your contacts, your 
messages, Web activity, or location. Users searching for the 
privacy friendly option, if it exists there at all, often must 
click through a much longer process and many screens.
    Mr. Steyer, is clear, easy to understand user interface 
design a critical component of achieving informed consent and 
preserving any rights to consumer data privacy?
    Mr. Steyer. That is a great question, Senator Fischer, and 
it is. It really is. I think the truth is if we all think about 
ourselves--maybe there are one or two wizards up here, but I am 
not and I run a large organization that helps write privacy 
laws.
    So I think clear, easy-to-use information is absolutely 
critical. That is why I mentioned it in my opening remarks. 
This is complex stuff, and so we need to make it very easy for 
consumers to understand what their rights are and then how to 
exercise them. It is like having a privacy policy at the end of 
your phone, 80 pages on your phone, which no one ever reads. 
They just check here. So I think that is a really important 
element of what this committee and the Senate could do is make 
it simple and easy to understand for the consumer. If it is 
easy to understand for you folks, it will be fair to the 
consumer would be what I would say.
    Senator Fischer. I hope that is an endorsement.
    [Laughter.]
    Mr. Steyer. That is an endorsement, but it is also 
recognizing the complexity of this. It actually goes to the 
question Senator Schatz was asking. But it is really an 
important element of doing this right.
    Senator Fischer. Right.
    I appreciated Common Sense Media's endorsement of the bill 
that I have with Senator Warner, the DETOUR Act, and I believe 
that is going to guard against the manipulative user interfaces 
that are out there. Those are also known as dark patterns.
    Can a privacy framework that involves consent function 
properly if it does not also ensure that user interface design 
presents that fair and transparent options to manage our 
personal data setting, sir?
    Mr. Steyer. Is that directed to me?
    Senator Fischer. Yes, please.
    Mr. Steyer. You are absolutely right on that.
    By the way, the other point I would make is the fact that 
you and Senator Warner are working on the dark patterns, the 
fact that Senator Blunt is working with Senator Markey and 
others on bipartisan legislation, this is an area where--I keep 
saying it. This is common sense for everybody, and I really do 
believe that this committee, acting this way in a bipartisan 
fashion, is critical.
    But, yes, we have got to keep it simple and easy. Even 
though it is complex, you have got to make it simple and easy 
for the average user.
    Senator Fischer. Thank you.
    Ms. Dixon, as the GDPR has been implemented, have you seen 
any trends for companies that have taken steps toward focusing 
on user-centered design or others that are avoiding it on 
purpose?
    Ms. Dixon. We certainly, in the run-up to the GDPR, saw a 
lot of attempts in particular by the platforms to redesign 
their user engagement flow and to reexamine whether the 
consents they were collecting met the threshold articulated in 
the GDPR. But some of the investigations that we now have 
underway are looking at whether the ways in which in particular 
the transparent information is being delivered to users really 
meets the standards anticipated by the GDPR.
    So, for example, a lot of organizations have implemented 
layered privacy notices, which is something generally that we 
recommend to avoid the need to have a 100-page privacy notice. 
But on the other hand, there can be issues of inconsistency 
between the layers, too many layers for a user to go through to 
get basic information.
    So through the investigations that we have ongoing at the 
moment, we are examining whether the standards anticipated by 
the GDPR are being met and in what circumstances we say they 
are not being met. So there should be further clarification on 
that in the coming months.
    Senator Fischer. So as Mr. Steyer was saying, keep it 
simple.
    Ms. Dixon. Keeping it simple is always good.
    Senator Fischer. As we look to draft Federal data privacy 
policy, it is important that we do look at preventing 
irresponsible data use from the start. Ms. Dixon, you actually 
noted the complaint of someone who had been contacted by a 
headstone company after a family member passed away, generated 
by combining obituary data and public address data. And I am 
going to ask all of you the same question that I asked the 
previous industry panel, and hopefully you can respond in 
writing to the question since I am out of time.
    But I would just really appreciate if you could give one 
example of an unreasonable data practice to us. I think that 
would be helpful when we do look at trying to keep this simple 
and what is going to be needed. So thank you very much.
    Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    The Chairman. Can each of you do that for us on the record? 
We would appreciate it if you would.
    Senator Tester.

                 STATEMENT OF HON. JON TESTER, 
                   U.S. SENATOR FROM MONTANA

    Senator Tester. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Thank you all for being here. I know you all came to talk 
about production ag today, so I am going to ask some questions 
about it.
    I have been farming for about the last 40 years, and one of 
the big advances in agriculture that has happened pretty 
recently is called precision ag where you get computers on your 
tractor that measure just about everything you do, from the 
amount of fertilizer you put down to the kind of seeds you put 
in the ground, to the number of acres you cover. You name it.
    So I have got this information. It is obviously connected 
up with a higher God. Is it possible for folks or do you know 
if they can use that information right now, if they can gather 
that information to try to influence my buying decisions? Do 
you understand what I am saying? I am saying we have got 
technology on the tractor that measures just about everything 
you do. Is that information gatherable? Just somebody taking 
that information and sweeping it up. Is it possible for them to 
do it? Can anybody answer that?
    Ms. Guliani. So I cannot answer specifically. I think with 
agriculture and some of, I think, the new technologies, I do 
think that a big problem is secondary uses. Right? Think about 
if I buy eggs from a grocery store and I give somebody my 
address to deliver those eggs, I expect that they are going to 
use my address to get the eggs to me. What I do not expect is 
that they are going to tell an insurance company that I bought 
eggs and they should charge me a higher rate.
    Senator Tester. OK. So what gives them the right to do 
that? What gives them the right to share that information? It 
looks to me like why should it not all be off the books unless 
I say, you know, what, go ahead and give it to my doc, give it 
to my insurance company, give it to a guy I am going to buy a 
car from, I do not care, go ahead and do it. Otherwise, if I do 
not do that, no sharing information. Period. What I do is my 
business and nobody can share it. It is against the law.
    Ms. Guliani. I mean, I would agree. And I think that what 
functionally happens sometimes is that there is a 30-page 
privacy policy. Somebody does not understand what is in it, nor 
do they have the time to read it.
    Senator Tester. So it looks to me like it does not have to 
be 30 pages. Does it? Could it not be just a simple question: 
Can we use your information, yes or no?
    Ms. Guliani. Yes. And I do not believe that there should be 
secondary uses and secondary sharing unless the person knows 
what is happening and has provided specific consent for it.
    Senator Tester. OK. So the lady from Dublin, would the GDPR 
stop the collection that I just talked about? And by the way, 
that is a scenario I use for agriculture, but you could use it 
on anything. Would they stop it? Would your rules stop it?
    Ms. Dixon. Thank you, Senator. It is a very interesting 
question.
    As I mentioned in my written statement, the GDPR is high-
level, principles-based, technology-neutral, and it does not 
prohibit any specific forms of personal data processing. It 
provides that any form of personal data processing could be 
legitimized.
    So in this case, what we would have to do is trace through 
the various actions of the company and look at whether the 
principles of the GDPR are being met, in particular in this 
case around purpose limitation, transparency to you as a user 
in terms of sharing the data with third parties and the 
purposes for which it would be used. And to the extent that 
consent is legitimizing the processing, whether you had 
granular options to consent or not to consent. And so it is 
possible that the GDPR would prohibit it depending on how it is 
being done, but it would involve the specific parsing against 
the principles.
    Senator Tester. A previous question asked you about fines, 
and you said none have been levied yet because your 
investigations have not been done. You have been in effect for 
11 months since it was put into effect?
    Ms. Dixon. It is 11 months since the GDPR came into 
application. Some of the investigations have been open more 
recently, but we have one or two that are open since May.
    Senator Tester. Since May. So we are coming on a year for 
the investigations?
    Ms. Dixon. That is right.
    Senator Tester. How quickly are they to a point where you 
can--are these investigations so complicated that we are 
looking at another year or is it weeks?
    Ms. Dixon. No. I think in the coming months over the 
summer, we will conclude decisions on some of them. They are 
complex investigations. There are also significant procedural 
safeguards that we have to apply because the sanctions are 
significant. So we do have to allow the party's right to be 
heard at various junctures in the investigation and 
decisionmaking.
    In addition, because of the form of a one stop shop we have 
in the EU, other procedural issues arise.
    Senator Tester. And very quickly because my time has run 
out. How are the fines levied? How do you determine the fine? 
Is that dictated in the GDPR or do you do it on the size of the 
company?
    Ms. Dixon. So article 83 of the GDPR sets out the limits on 
the fines and provides details of aggravating and----
    Senator Tester. Can you give me an idea of what the largest 
fines are under the GDPR?
    Ms. Dixon. The largest fine would be 4 percent of the 
global turnover for the preceding year of an undertaking.
    Senator Tester. Thank you.
    The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Tester.
    Senator Blackburn.

              STATEMENT OF HON. MARSHA BLACKBURN, 
                  U.S. SENATOR FROM TENNESSEE

    Senator Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    And thank you to each of you for being here today. And, Mr. 
Steyer, good to see you.
    Mr. Steyer. Nice to see you.
    Senator Blackburn. We have been talking privacy for quite a 
while.
    Mr. Steyer. We have.
    Senator Blackburn. Ms. Guliani, I am certain you know this, 
and to our friends who have joined us today, I think that for 
so long what we heard on Capitol Hill from people is do not do 
anything that is going to harm the golden goose. Leave it 
alone. And this is why I introduced the BROWSER Act several 
years ago, bipartisan in the House, and why I have long held 
that consumers need to possess the toolbox to protect, as I 
term it, their virtual you, which is you and your presence 
online. And this is vitally important as Americans move more of 
their transactional life online.
    And, Ms. Guliani, you said it well. There should not be a 
secondary use for other companies to know what credit cards we 
use, what time of month we pay our bills, the sites we search, 
the products we order. And for that to be data-mined and then 
repackaged and sold specific not to our name or physical 
address maybe, but to our IP address, which is our virtual you.
    So that is why the BROWSER does a few things very well. It 
says opt in for sensitive data, opt out for non-sensitive data, 
and one set of rules for the entire Internet ecosystem with one 
regulator.
    And I think when we look at an individual's privacy, that 
we ought to focus on doing a few things well, to do it 
understandably, and as we have discussed in the past, Mr. 
Steyer, to make certain that the protections are there for 
children and that their information is protected online.
    And I am delighted that the chairman is bringing this issue 
forward. Privacy and data security are essential because this 
transactional life that we live online underpins every single 
industrial sector of our nation's economy.
    And, Ms. Dixon, I want to ask you about the difference, let 
us say, for Ireland with having an EU-wide regime on privacy as 
opposed to an Ireland-specific. Preemption I think is vitally 
important, and I would like to hear from you what the 
difference has been by having the ability to have it EU-wide 
versus just for Ireland.
    Ms. Dixon. So, Senator Blackburn, the GDPR, as you note, is 
a direct effect regulation of the EU as opposed to a directive 
which requires transposition into member state law, which was 
the previous regime we had prior to last May. But, in fact, as 
a regulation, the GDPR is still something of a hybrid because 
each EU member state, nonetheless, had to implement a national 
law to give further effect to the GDPR.
    Senator Blackburn. It underpins.
    Ms. Dixon. It underpins and gives further effect to the 
GDPR and implements some choices that were left to each 
individual member state under the GDPR.
    So what we have is actually a hybrid where we have a 2018 
Irish Data Protection Act that guides us in terms of the 
operation of our investigations and the procedures we must 
follow and around aspects such as the age of digital consent 
for children, which is set at 16 in Ireland, and then we have 
the GDPR. In the case of any conflict, which there should not 
be, the GDPR reigns supreme under the doctrine of supremacy of 
the EU law. So it is something of a hybrid, and there are still 
member state flavors in terms of choices made under the GDPR.
    Senator Blackburn. Thank you. I appreciated a visit with 
your EU Privacy Commissioner a few weeks ago and then this week 
visited with the Commissioner from New Zealand. And I think it 
is instructive to us that whether it is GDPR, as it comes 
through its first year of enactment, or other countries that 
are looking at enacting privacy policy, that it is important to 
our citizens that we do something and that we do it right the 
first time. So I appreciate your participation and look forward 
to continuing the conversation.
    I yield back my time.
    The Chairman. Ms. Dixon, the GDPR directs European member 
states to make certain decisions, for example, the age of 
consent. Is that what you are saying?
    Ms. Dixon. So under certain articles of the GDPR, such as 
article 8, the age of consent for children accessing 
information, society services was set at 16, but it gave member 
states the choice to implement as low as 13 under their member 
state laws. So, in fact, what you find is that the majority of 
EU member states went ahead and implemented an age of 13. So 
there are a number of articles like that where member state 
choice was implementable.
    The Chairman. Maybe we could search that ourselves. But if 
you would help us by supplementing your testimony and giving us 
some examples of that, I would appreciate it. Thank you.
    Senator Peters.

                STATEMENT OF HON. GARY PETERS, 
                   U.S. SENATOR FROM MICHIGAN

    Senator Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    And thank you to each of our witnesses. It has been really 
a fascinating discussion.
    And, Mr. Steyer, I do believe you are right that this is an 
important issue that the time is now. In fact, I think the 
issue of privacy, given the explosion of data and technologies 
with the power to collect a lot of data are continuing to 
expand. This could be one of the defining issues of this decade 
as to how we deal with it because with data comes power, and 
that power is based on data collected from us each 
individually. So we have to be leaning into this very heavily. 
So I agree with that.
    My first question, though, for you, Ms. Guliani, is an 
example of some concerns that I have. There is a popular 
pregnancy tracking app Ovia that tracks medications, mood, 
bodily functions, and more and even use it to track newborn 
medical information for women that use this app. You may be 
familiar with it. The app has come under scrutiny because it 
allows employers to actually pay to gain access to the details 
about their workers' personal lives. Your testimony--you were 
very clear and others have mentioned about how Federal law 
should limit purposes for which consumer data can be used.
    So my question, though, is what should be included in a 
Federal privacy standard to ensure that employers, in 
particular, cannot have access to their employees' medical 
information from an app such as Ovia?
    Ms. Guliani. I mean, I would say first that that is 
information that should not be given to an employer absent the 
consent of the individual using the app, and they should not be 
denied using it if they say, look, I do not want my employer to 
know that but I would still like you to measure these things. 
So I think that those are sort of two sides of the same coin.
    And what I worry with apps like these is, again, these long 
privacy policies that individuals do not have time to read or 
understand that effectively require them to sign away all these 
rights just to use a service.
    Senator Peters. Well, to follow up on that comment, in Ovia 
they have a 6,000-word consent form. The company is granted, 
quote, a royalty-free, perpetual, and irrevocable license 
throughout the universe to utilize and exploit their de-
identified personal information. The company is allowed to 
sell, lease, or lend aggregated personal information to third 
parties. This basically means that all of the information that 
was gathered--a package can be sold to whoever they want 
whenever as long is it does not meet their de-identified 
criteria.
    But how difficult is it for a company to re-identify 
somebody if there is enough data about them? Let us say a 
smaller company that may only have one woman who is pregnant--
could you identify that person probably even with de-identified 
data?
    Ms. Guliani. Yes. I mean, re-identification I think is 
becoming easier, and there are companies that are innovating 
around that. So, for example, there have been MIT studies that 
found that de-identified data could be re-identified 95 percent 
of the time with accuracy. So I think it is really important 
that when we talk about de-identified data, we are really clear 
on what that means and making sure that it is, in fact, de-
identified.
    Senator Peters. Right.
    Mr. Polonetsky, an example. If I go to the doctor and I get 
prescribed an allergy medicine and then I put that information 
on an app that I have to keep track of the number of doses I 
have to take of medicine or whatever it may be, how do you 
envision a Federal privacy law, working with existing laws such 
as HIPAA, to ensure that my medical information is indeed 
protected after I put it on my own app?
    Mr. Polonetsky. Yes. This is increasingly going to be an 
important issue because patients are increasingly downloading 
their medical records, and there is obviously great value in 
people being able to see that data, maybe take it to a 
different doctor, analyze it themselves. But they may not 
appreciate that once they have downloaded it from their HIPAA-
covered entity, that is is now in their hands, it is in their 
app.
    Legislation should recognize that there are sensitive 
categories of data that are going to be subject to much 
stricter and tougher controls. I may want to share that with 
another doctor. I may have a friend who is a doctor. I may want 
to show it to my spouse. And so I certainly should be able to 
share it, but it ought to be very clear and very practical, and 
I ought to be able to revoke that consent.
    It is not likely to be covered by HIPAA, but we 
increasingly have data that is outside of the regulatory world 
where we need to make sure that the consent standard in any 
proposed legislation is indeed balanced.
    Senator Peters. In March, it was reported that a data 
broker tried to sell the names, addresses, high schools, and 
hobbies of 1.2 million children. This was uncovered through the 
violation of Vermont's recently enacted law to regulate data 
brokers.
    Mr. Polonetsky, as you know, the Vermont law requires data 
brokers to register with the state annually and gives us some 
transparency as to who is actually out there, who is actually 
collecting all this information.
    Understanding that the law was just recently implemented, 
do you have an early assessment of the law, and should we look 
at that law in guiding some of our work at the Federal level?
    Mr. Polonetsky. I do not have enough information to know 
how it is playing out, but it is clear that people today have a 
limited idea of the number of places their data goes when they 
are online or when they can transact. And providing a simpler 
way for them to get to those endpoints so they do not have to 
go to multiple places so they can say no once or they can go to 
one place and effectively take their data out I think is 
valuable.
    Frankly, I think it is valuable for companies too, the 
people who really do not want to be getting catalogs in the 
mail or do not want to be marketed to. It is costly to send 
some of that out, and I would like to believe that at the end 
of the day, there is a win-win by giving people more control 
over what they receive from a whole range of third parties.
    Senator Peters. Thank you. Appreciate it.
    The Chairman. I think there are a lot of win-wins out 
there.
    Senator Thune.

                 STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN THUNE, 
                 U.S. SENATOR FROM SOUTH DAKOTA

    Senator Thune. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Ms. Dixon, in your testimony you touch on industry codes of 
conduct. Can you elaborate on how industry codes of conduct are 
intended to operate under the GDPR and whether you think such 
codes of conduct enhance compliance with the law?
    Ms. Dixon. So codes of conduct are a new feature of EU data 
protection law, and we do believe that they are going to pay 
dividends once they get off the ground. The European Data 
Protection Board has recently issued guidance on how it is 
intended that codes of conduct would work. And in the first 
instance, it is up to industry groupings to bring forward 
proposed codes of conduct that they would agree to implement. 
They have the benefits of creating a level playing field within 
industry sectors and driving up standards.
    Another key feature of codes of conduct under the GDPR is 
that it is intended that there would be an independent 
monitoring body paid for by the industry sector that would 
monitor compliance with the code of conduct and ensure that 
complaints from individuals--that the exercise of their rights, 
for example, is not being adhered to--are dealt with 
efficiently. So this is an area of the GDPR that we look 
forward to rolling out over the coming years.
    Senator Thune. Let me just direct this to everybody, and it 
is more of a general question. But Mr. Polonetsky, Mr. Steyer, 
and Ms. Guliani, with respect to privacy expectations of our 
consumers here in the United States, do you think the status 
quo is working? Yes or no?
    Mr. Steyer. No, but I would tell you that there has been a 
sea change in awareness in the last year. I think one of the 
most encouraging things that we have seen, other than the 
bipartisanship, I think, in understanding these very issues 
that affect everybody, is that the public is finally coming to 
understand that privacy really matters. Remember, it is a 
fundamental right, but people have forgotten that. I have four 
kids, and I remember talking to my kids about this a few years 
ago, about do you even understand what privacy is.
    So I think we are at a watersheds moment, which I think the 
work of this Committee and the broader Senate and Congress will 
drive forward. The public is finally understanding this is 
really my own personal information. It is really important, and 
I have the right to control it. So I think we are at a great 
moment, and I think that honestly, Senator Thune, if this 
Committee moves forward and the Senate moves forward, I think 
it will be incredibly important not just legally and from an 
enforcement and accountability standard for behavior, but 
public awareness. So I think we are at a really important 
tipping point that you all can drive forward in a very 
important way.
    Mr. Polonetsky. Senator, my 17-year-old son is sitting 
behind me and I have got a 15-year-old daughter, and it has 
been fascinating to see how they have been using technology and 
I do not think they think about it in terms of privacy. All 
they know is that their Instagram page should not have all of 
their photos. It should have the ones they curate. And they 
have another account they use a little more flexibility, a 
little more sloppily.
    My son is a big SnapChat user, and he is not thinking about 
it, oh, my pictures disappear. I am just saying hi. Why should 
that be around forever?
    And so I am optimistic that the technology is finally 
capturing the actual reality of how people act. Somehow when 
some of these sites launched, the notion was the more you 
share, the more people click on it, the more people see your 
stuff. And there is a place for that, for activism, for 
outreach. But that is not the default for the way most of us 
live. We want to talk to friends and family and small groups 
and alumni groups and the like. And somehow the engineering 
answer was, sorry, if it is on the Internet and it is public, 
it is public for everybody.
    So these are not perfect. You know, it is not perfect 
privacy when your photo disappears. It is probably somewhere. 
But it gave me a level of obscurity that actually ends up being 
critical and nuanced.
    So I would like to see us nudge companies to solve some of 
these problems by having technology reflect the way humans act. 
Right? It is supposed to be in service of our needs, not in 
service solely of advertising and marketing. I see that 
pushback happening. I would like to think it is because of 
privacy pressure, but I actually think it is because of what 
the younger generation actually wants. And they do not call it 
privacy. They call it this is the way I think about my 
relationships.
    Senator Thune. But the answer is no, the status quo is not 
working.
    Mr. Polonetsky. The status quo is not working.
    Senator Thune. Ms. Guliani, yes or no. I have another 
question I need to ask here.
    Ms. Guliani. Yes. The status quo is not working, and I just 
want to highlight that I think we are increasingly 
understanding that that status quo is hurting vulnerable 
populations in some cases the most, you know, exacerbating 
economic inequality and some of those issues. And so I think 
the law should reflect the special harm that is being placed on 
consumers.
    Senator Thune. And I agree the status quo is not working, 
which is exactly why this committee began to lay the groundwork 
for privacy legislation in the last Congress and we are 
building on that. I believe it is one of the issues that 
Congress should be able to work on together on a bipartisan 
basis, and I look forward to working with Chairman Wicker and 
other members of this Committee to find consensus on this very 
important issue.
    One very quick final question, and that, again, I think can 
be yes or no. But on principle, would any of you oppose any 
Federal law with preemption in it? Yes or no.
    Ms. Guliani. We would have serious concerns with broad 
Federal preemption.
    Mr. Steyer. I have serious concerns with broad Federal 
preemption.
    Mr. Polonetsky. I think preemption can be done carefully so 
that it preempts the inconsistencies that make compliance hard 
but preserve the rights and protections that I think we want to 
preserve.
    Senator Thune. I would be interested--and I guess we can 
take this for the record, Mr. Chairman--in your thoughts. You 
all referred to a Federal law as strong as California and just 
to maybe speak specifically to what you mean by that.
    Thank you.
    The Chairman. Thank you.
    And, Senator Thune, you questioned long enough for Senator 
Markey to get back in his seat. So Senator Markey is next.

               STATEMENT OF HON. EDWARD MARKEY, 
                U.S. SENATOR FROM MASSACHUSETTS

    Senator Markey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much. And 
thank you, Senator Thune.
    I have long advocated for privacy protections that include 
the principles of notice and consent, but a Federal privacy 
bill must build on that framework by explicitly prohibiting 
certain types of data use. Today companies amass troves of 
consumers' data and then repurpose that information to target 
ads in discriminatory ways.
    And that is why I recently introduced the Privacy Bill of 
Rights Act, comprehensive privacy legislation that bans 
discriminatory uses of consumers' private information. This 
legislation explicitly prohibits companies from using 
Americans? data to target employment, housing, health care, 
education, or financial opportunities in harmful, 
discriminatory ways.
    Ms. Guliani, can you provide one example of how a company 
currently uses consumers' personal data to target individuals 
of particular genders or socioeconomic groups in ways that 
threaten Americans' civil rights?
    Ms. Guliani. Sure. I mean, I can give you a recent 
settlement in an ACLU case. You know, over the last several 
years, there were multiple charges that Facebook was 
facilitating discriminatory advertising, particularly in the 
housing, credit, and employment contexts where Federal law 
prohibits discrimination. So, for example, allowing targeting 
of ads based on factors like race or gender or things that 
would be proxies for that.
    Over the years, complaints were made. The company said that 
they were going to resolve the problem but were slow to do so. 
And so the ACLU and other civil rights organizations filed a 
lawsuit, and the company, to its credit, has settled that 
lawsuit.
    But I think what this does is speak to a broader concern, 
and that is a question of how in this new online ecosystem are 
advertisers and others exacerbating discrimination, charging 
different prices for, let us say, a bus ticket, not allowing 
African Americans or women to see employment or housing 
opportunities.
    Senator Markey. So let me just follow up on that. Do each 
of the rest of you agree with Ms. Guliani that it should be 
illegal for companies to use consumers? personal data in these 
harmful discriminatory ways? Ms. Dixon.
    Ms. Dixon. So, Senator Markey, I think in terms of 
legislation prohibiting certain uses, as I have outlined, the 
GDPR is set up as principles-based and does not specifically 
prohibit uses but principles of fair processing, as an example, 
will go some way to tackling the issues that you have outlined.
    I think in terms of the issue of discrimination--and there 
is some complexity to the issue----
    Senator Markey. But in general, do you agree with Ms. 
Guliani? In general on discrimination?
    Ms. Dixon. In general, discrimination----
    Senator Markey. OK.
    Mr. Polonetsky.
    Mr. Polonetsky. In general, yes.
    Senator Markey. Mr. Steyer.
    Mr. Steyer. Absolutely I agree.
    Senator Markey. Thank you all.
    So let us move to children's privacy. I will go to you, Mr. 
Steyer. Children are a unique, vulnerable group online. That is 
why earlier this Congress I introduced bipartisan legislation 
with Senator Hawley to protect kids' and teens' privacy. This 
legislation is an update to the Children's Online Privacy 
Protection Act, a law which I authored back in 1997.
    This law creates critical new safeguards for young people. 
The legislation would extend protections to 13, 14, and 15-
year-olds by requiring consent before collecting personal 
information about them, ban targeted ads to children, create an 
eraser button for parents and children to allow them to 
eliminate publicly available personal information submitted by 
the child or teen, and establish a youth privacy and marketing 
division at the Federal Trade Commission, which will be 
responsible specifically for addressing the privacy of children 
and minors in our country and marketing directly at children 
and minors in our country. We know we have a crisis in the 
country in terms of the targeting of children in our country by 
these online companies.
    So, Mr. Steyer, why is it critical that any comprehensive 
privacy law include these heightened protections for children 
and teens?
    Mr. Steyer. We totally support the law, and we are glad it 
is bipartisan. We just believe you should fold the COPPA 2.0 
law into this broader law that you are doing.
    The truth is--we all know this as parents and 
grandparents--kids do not understand stuff. They may be more 
technically literate in a way, but they just do not understand 
it. So they deserve special protections, and the COPPA 2.0 law 
that you all have introduced is absolutely spot on, and I would 
urge everybody on this committee and all 100 Senators to 
support it.
    Senator Markey. Do you each agree that special protections 
have to be built in for children? Ms. Guliani.
    Ms. Guliani. Yes.
    Senator Markey. Mr. Polonetsky.
    Mr. Polonetsky. Yes.
    Senator Markey. Ms. Dixon.
    Mr. Steyer. And teens. COPPA stops at 12, and we all know 
what teenagers are like. They need special protections too.
    Senator Markey. So this bill would lift it up to 16.
    Mr. Steyer. Correct.
    Senator Markey. And that is kind of, I think, a reasonable 
place to put it. I wish I could make it higher, but I think at 
least at 16, kids are just unaware even though you are saying 
technically sophisticated, but their judgment in terms of what 
it might mean for themselves in the long run just has not been 
well thought out.
    Mr. Steyer. And California goes to 16. We took it up to 16 
in the CCPA.
    Senator Markey. And in Europe?
    Ms. Dixon. 16 in Ireland, 13 in other member states.
    Senator Markey. Yes. I am Irish.
    [Laughter.]
    Senator Markey. We like our privacy.
    Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Markey.
    Senator Moran.

                STATEMENT OF HON. JERRY MORAN, 
                    U.S. SENATOR FROM KANSAS

    Senator Moran. Chairman, thank you.
    Thank you four for joining us today on this important 
topic.
    Let me start with Mr. Polonetsky. The terms of a Federal 
consumer privacy bill. Consumers I believe would benefit if 
Congress provides clear and measurable requirements in a 
statutory text while also including a level of flexibility in 
the form of narrow and specific rulemaking authorities 
presumably to the FTC. That would help account for evolving 
technological developments.
    My questions are how should this committee approach 
providing the FTC with rulemaking authority, and do you see 
value in what some of us have been calling strong guardrails 
around that rulemaking authority to preserve certainty to 
consumers that we aim to protect?
    Mr. Polonetsky. I think our proposed legislation--the 
Committee's proposed legislation, which hopefully will come 
forward should put as much detail as we can put in the bill 
because I think there are going to be key issues to negotiate. 
But clearly there are going to be areas that are going to need 
more time, where progress of time is going to require perhaps 
updates and nuance, and the FTC certainly needs APA rulemaking 
authority to fill those gaps. But I do think setting the 
parameters so that the considerations that the FTC should look 
at can be spelled out so that businesses can anticipate so that 
commission heads, no matter what party is in leading and so 
forth, in the right direction I think is going to be critical.
    Senator Moran. This is not exactly the right words I do not 
think, but the theory that I have is that we have to provide 
lots of certainty but not too much certainty. Where do we find 
that sweet spot that allows this to work well today and into 
the future?
    Ms. Dixon, you indicated in your testimony--I think I am 
quoting this about right--the aim equally of a consistent and 
harmonized data protection law across the EU is to ensure a 
level playing field for all businesses and a consistent digital 
market in which consumers can have trust.
    Would you be concerned that EU consumers' trust in the 
digital market would be undermined if the EU lacked a 
harmonized approach to privacy? And related to that is, do you 
think the GDPR has provided clearer privacy requirements to 
companies than if each EU country adopted a different privacy 
requirement?
    Ms. Dixon. So I think certainly it would be the case that 
EU service users' trust would be undermined if we do not give 
full effect to this harmonized regulation now in the EU, and 
it's more a case of companies, rather than consumers, at the 
moment arguing that some of the harmonization is not coming 
into effect as anticipated because of member state choices that 
have been made. So the European Data Protection Board is a 
grouping of all of the EU national supervisory authorities, and 
we are working very hard to give effect to a harmonized 
implementation through guidance that we issue, but also through 
cooperation and consistency mechanisms that mean, when I 
conclude the investigations I referenced earlier, I will have 
to bring my decision to the European Data Protection Board and 
take utmost account of the views of the other EU 27 in 
finalizing my decision. So I think the harmonization is 
extremely important not just in terms of a level playing field, 
but in terms of the consumer trust.
    Senator Moran. Thank you.
    Part of the conversation here has been things are getting 
better. People are more interested in privacy. But we have also 
talked about how difficult it is to--what you are thinking 
about when you opt in and opt out, where the responsibility 
lies.
    Are consumers currently considering privacy practices when 
choosing between an online service provider? Are there enough 
companies using privacy as a competitive advantage? Any 
consumer paying attention to this and there is now an economic 
reward for privacy protections?
    Mr. Steyer. I would like to speak to that. I think when we 
passed the California bill last year, we were working with 
Satya Nadella at Microsoft, Tim Cook at Apple, Mark Benioff at 
SalesForce. They absolutely know that--there is no way that 
Apple and Microsoft do not see that as a competitive advantage 
now which, Senator Moran, I think is a very healthy thing.
    But that alone is not enough. That is why I said in my 
earlier comments about how important it is for the Senate and 
for the Congress to pass comprehensive, strong Federal privacy 
protections.
    But there is no question. Just look at Apple's marketing 
campaign that is out there right now. They are all over 
privacy. We meet with them at the top levels all the time. They 
have decided this is both the right thing to do and also the 
right thing to do for their business. And so has Microsoft. So 
the wave is coming.
    Senator Moran. What a great blend that will be if we do our 
jobs correctly and the consumer demands this from their 
providers.
    Mr. Steyer. Agreed.
    Senator Moran. Let me ask a final question. Just a yes or 
no answer. If Congress were to enact what we hope is meaningful 
privacy legislation, would you each support the attorney 
general of our various states having enforcement capabilities?
    Ms. Guliani. Yes. I would strongly encourage that, as well 
as State enforcement agencies.
    Mr. Steyer. Completely agree. Absolutely I think State AGs 
are critical, and a private right of action is a good idea too.
    Mr. Polonetsky. AGs have a key role.
    Senator Moran. Thank you all very much.
    Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    The Chairman. Thank you.
    Senator Rosen.

                STATEMENT OF HON. JACKY ROSEN, 
                    U.S. SENATOR FROM NEVADA

    Senator Rosen. Thank you.
    This is an amazing hearing and I have so many questions.
    I am going to first start with some vulnerable population 
questions. One of our most vulnerable populations are seniors, 
our disabled veterans, our hearing, our deaf community. I have 
over 38,000 deaf and hard of hearing people in the state of 
Nevada. They rely on IP captioned telephone service to 
communicate. We all know what that is. As privacy concerns, 
what are we doing to protect those vulnerable populations who 
are using the telephone, using these other services because of 
a disability?
    Ms. Guliani. So I think that this is one of the reasons 
that having a privacy framework is so important. I mean, you 
mentioned the disabled population. Low income individuals rely 
on their phones more for Internet access and to do other day-
to-day activities. And what we do not want is a system where as 
a condition of using these things that are critical to everyday 
living, people have to hand over their personal data and that 
personal data can have downstream consequences.
    And so I think that as part of any framework, we have to 
consider, number one, limiting the extent to which somebody can 
require you to give consent just as a condition of using a 
service. And we also have to be really skeptical and outlaw 
sort of what has been called pay for privacy schemes where I am 
just going to charge you more if you choose to exert your 
privacy rights.
    Mr. Polonetsky. Senator, I would urge the Committee to hear 
from the disability community because I think there is actually 
a really nuanced set of views. Certainly the community--and I 
will not speak for them although we have done some joint work 
recently--is worried about new ways that they can be 
discriminated against, but they are also passionate about the 
ways assisted technology and data--they want a smart home 
speaker to be able to control devices if they cannot use the 
traditional UI. They do not want their data sold, but getting 
that balance right so the data they do want can support them is 
certainly important.
    Senator Rosen. So as I have been sitting here listening--
and I get the pleasure of being one of the last questioners--is 
that it seems to me that there are two issues about your data. 
It is kind of the who, what, where, when, and how. The who is 
your personal data. It is your name, your birth date, your 
Social Security number, whatever. You own that. Right? Your 
baseline definition. Then you have your recorded behavior, if 
you will, your usage, your active usage, your passive usage. 
What is caught on recording and geolocation, that is your what, 
when, and how.
    So the real issue is who owns your behavior. Right? I mean, 
there are new safety issues, security for your personal 
birthday and all those kinds of things. So who owns your 
behavior is the issue, and what do they do with it? And the 
real value and the real threat is the monetization of your 
usage data. That is where it is. It is economics. Let us just 
put it right there.
    So how do you think that we can tailor some legislation 
that protects your usage information? We are trying to get 
better about protecting that personal identify, the who, but 
what about the what, where, when, and how that happens outside 
of you, where you shop, where you drive by, where you record on 
your voicemail?
    Mr. Steyer. So, Senator Rosen, I mean, it is a very 
important question. It is a very good question. I think the 
truth is we should broadly protect--allow the individual to 
control not just their own data but their behavior. I used the 
term earlier, ``data minimization.'' It was one of the big 
issues in the California law and in GDPR, and it is a company 
should only be able to use the data for a necessary business 
purpose, not a secondary purpose. When Senator Tester was 
asking the question about the farm implements, why should that 
be sold----
    Senator Rosen. Or the pregnancy, the same thing.
    Mr. Steyer. Right, or the pregnancy.
    So I think very strict and clear limits and guardrails 
around that are absolutely critical to a strong privacy law. I 
think everybody on both sides of the aisle would agree with 
that. And again, the more you guys can make that clear to your 
colleagues but also to the public, the more we will all win.
    Senator Rosen. And would you think since there is such a 
strong economic benefit to the monetization of your data, that 
there should be strong economic sanctions if violations occur?
    Mr. Steyer. I would. And the only thing I would just say is 
the big thing to simplify it is the business model is 
everything. So if you really want to understand how the 
companies behave--because remember, the technology industry is 
not monolithic--you really have to take them company by 
company. It is all about the business model. So if their 
business model is based on monetizing your personal information 
through ads, you are going to have to restrict those companies 
much more.
    Senator Rosen. What about using new technology? So you have 
a smart car. You are going to drive by a certain coffee shop or 
grocery store every day. Do they say, well, this person drives 
by there? That is kind of your location. That is your passive 
usage----
    Mr. Steyer. If I opt in. If I opt into that, but give the 
consumer the right to opt in, not force them to opt out.
    Senator Rosen. Thank you. I appreciate it and yield back my 
time.
    The Chairman. Thank you very much.
    Senator Blumenthal.

             STATEMENT OF HON. RICHARD BLUMENTHAL, 
                 U.S. SENATOR FROM CONNECTICUT

    Senator Blumenthal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you 
for having this hearing with these very expert and 
knowledgeable witnesses.
    I have heard a lot of worries about the ongoing effort, and 
I am a part of it in the Congress to frame Federal standards 
that will protect privacy. I have asked one panel after another 
whether the people of the United States should have less 
privacy protection than California. Nobody believes they 
should. And I assume nobody on this panel thinks that the 
people of the United States deserve less privacy protection 
than the people of California. Correct?
    Mr. Steyer. Correct.
    Mr. Polonetsky. Correct.
    Senator Blumenthal. Thank you.
    At the same time, there is a legitimate fear that we would 
either advertently or maybe inadvertently undermine State 
protections. I think that is a real danger, and I would oppose 
any effort that preempts State laws so as to weaken protection 
for consumers. And I think we are all--or we should be--on 
guard against that danger.
    I know that businesses want a common definition and 
consistent rules. I also understand some of the criticisms of 
the California law. Some of that criticism smacks of opposition 
to the protections and the substance of those safeguards for 
consumer protection. Federal rules simply cannot be an 
opportunity to weaken a strong framework that industry resists 
or opposes. We can learn from California. We have to provide at 
least the same standards. In fact, I believe they ought to be 
even more rigorous and more protective.
    So let me ask particularly Mr. Steyer and Ms. Guliani if 
Congress fails to act now, are other states likely to 
successfully pass similar bills in the near term. What is on 
the horizon?
    Mr. Steyer. So I can speak to that. I would say I believe 
Senator Cantwell knows the State of Washington just considered 
a fairly--it was a different version of the bill and it died. 
It is the only one that is on the table right now.
    So barring action by the Congress, the California law goes 
into effect in January 2020. It will essentially become the law 
of the land, and I believe that the tech companies understand 
that. When we were writing it, we were aware of that. I do not 
think you are going to see this hodgepodge, mishmash.
    And to your point, Senator Blumenthal, the people who are 
really pushing preemption are primarily certain tech companies 
that want to weaken the California law. So your point of view 
of that as a floor that we should build upon for a strong, 
comprehensive Federal law is I think a very good framework.
    Senator Blumenthal. A floor, not a ceiling.
    Mr. Steyer. It is absolutely a floor, not a ceiling. And I 
think there are some very smart folks on this Committee who can 
build an even better law.
    Senator Blumenthal. First do no harm.
    Mr. Steyer. Exactly.
    Ms. Guliani. And if I could just speak to that point 
specifically. I mean, I think particularly in the area of 
technology, we are talking about rapid changes, and states have 
shown themselves to be more nimble and adapt to responding to 
those rapid changes. So what I really fear is a Federal regime 
that ties State hands, and when new technologies pop up, new 
problems pop up, we see gaps in a Federal framework that they 
are not able to address those problems. And I think 
particularly in an area where when it comes to consumer rights 
and consumer privacy, states have a long history of expertise 
and a long history of leading on these issues.
    Senator Blumenthal. Well, I share your predilections about 
the importance of State action, having been State official for 
about three decades and including two decades as State Attorney 
General in Connecticut. And both in terms of being more nimble 
and also closer to their constituents and sharing the effects--
we share the real life effects of privacy invasion--I think 
State officials are a ready and willing source of wisdom on 
this topic. And so I think we need to be very, very careful in 
what we do here that may in any way supplant what they are 
doing.
    Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Blumenthal.
    Senator Sinema.

               STATEMENT OF HON. KYRSTEN SINEMA, 
                   U.S. SENATOR FROM ARIZONA

    Senator Sinema. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding 
this hearing.
    Data privacy is an important topic for all Americans, and I 
am glad the Committee continues to explore this complicated 
issue from all angles. Every day we learn about new misuses of 
Americans' private data on the Internet, including recent 
examples in the past month of millions of social media 
passwords being stored in an unencrypted format.
    So this issue requires bipartisan solutions that protect 
the privacy and security of Arizonans while allowing 
innovation, creativity, and investment to flow into new and 
emerging technologies and businesses.
    I am particularly pleased this hearing focuses on the 
impact of data privacy legislation on consumers. They are the 
ones whose lives get upended if passwords get hacked or 
identities get stolen. And consumers should have the right to 
control their own private information.
    A particularly vulnerable population to privacy abuses and 
identity theft are elderly Americans. The United States has 
COPPA, a specialized privacy law to protect children, but our 
seniors also experience elevated risks of having their data 
misused. Elderly Americans sometimes struggle to navigate the 
complexities of privacy policies, and they are often the 
targets of fraud. I want to make sure that any Federal privacy 
law gives seniors in Arizona and across the country the tools 
they need to thrive in the digital economy and the protections 
they need to enjoy a productive and secure retirement.
    My first question is for Mr. Steyer, but I welcome the 
perspective of all of our witnesses. So thank you for your 
focus on children and the particular concerns they face. I 
think the consumer education piece is a critical aspect of any 
data privacy legislation. As you state in your testimony, many 
people who want to limit data collection by websites do not 
know how to do it, which is an issue of both transparency and 
digital literacy.
    Can you give a brief overview of your digital citizenship 
curriculum and discuss whether you think any of these tools are 
appropriate or could be adapted to educate older Americans?
    Mr. Steyer. Yes. I think that is a great question, Senator 
Sinema.
    So our digital literacy citizenship curriculum--75,000 
members schools now--is basically driver's ed for the Internet 
and cell phones. It is sort of the basic rules of the road. I 
think your point about seniors is a great one because they did 
not grow up with the technology. It is hard for teenagers who 
are first generation native technology users to understand some 
of this stuff. So why should a senior citizen?
    So I think the importance of consumer education in simple 
clear ways to understand what your rights are and then how to 
exercise them--it is basically digital literacy. And if you 
guys put this into the bill, we will create a curriculum for 
you for all age ranges in the country.
    Mr. Polonetsky. Senator, I would love to see the FTC really 
taking a lead role. They have a business outreach department. 
We do a lot of work in Europe. The challenge, frankly, has been 
the huge number of small businesses that are sending questions, 
that are sending e-mails that they do not need to send to ask 
for permission. It has been a big transition. And if we are 
going to pass a new law--and I hope we do--we should be ready 
to help the teacher who is creating an app because she thinks 
it is a better way to teach her kids so that she does not have 
to hire outside counsel. And I think the FTC, certainly Common 
Sense, and other groups, but I think the FTC, in addition to 
giving them those enforcement staff, giving them those 
education, outreach is critical.
    Ms. Guliani. I would just like to make a point. I think 
that the onus should not be on the individual. Right? I think 
your question sort of speaks to a larger problem which is the 
complexities and difficulties that not just elderly Americans 
but everybody faces. And I think that that is one of the 
reasons that we have supported an opt-in framework instead of 
an opt-out. When you talk about technical literacy, the 
difficulty someone may have in figuring out not only all of the 
apps they do business with, all of the entities that might have 
their data, but how to navigate the complex framework of opting 
out is just too much of a stress to put on consumers. That is 
why we have supported opt in.
    Senator Sinema. Thank you.
    Ms. Dixon. I would agree that you should not put too much 
emphasis in terms of the responsibility of the individual 
solely to protect themselves, but I think consumer education is 
very important. The Data Protection Commission in Ireland has 
just closed a consultation in relation to children and the 
exercise of their rights under the GDPR, and we consulted 
directly with children through schools. We developed lesson 
plans, which was in part an education of children around the 
uses of their personal data. So we very much believe in active 
communication to consumers through our website, through the 
promotion of case studies promoted by the media. And I think 
this is an important part of the jigsaw as well.
    Senator Sinema. Thank you.
    Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    The Chairman. Thank you very much.
    Senator Sullivan.

                STATEMENT OF HON. DAN SULLIVAN, 
                    U.S. SENATOR FROM ALASKA

    Senator Sullivan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    And I apologize to the witnesses for my late arrival, but I 
wanted to make sure I was able to ask at least a few questions 
on very important topic. And what I want to do--and again, if 
this has been covered, I apologize, but I wanted to focus a 
little bit more on the international aspects.
    We had a hearing, actually a subcommittee hearing, that I 
chaired yesterday with Senator Markey after our leader here set 
up a really important new subcommittee on economics and 
security. And the idea was kind of international standards and 
where we have typically led in this area--the United States--
the NIST Director was there and a number of other witnesses at 
the subcommittee hearing.
    But how are we suppose to think through as we look at these 
privacy standards and the different standards internationally? 
Obviously, there is what is going on in Europe. But there are 
also concerns that I have even more broadly than just what is 
happening in Europe is that when you have kind of the 5G race 
that is happening globally and Huawei in some ways leading 
that, that you might have a de facto leadership that relates to 
standards coming from China that, to be honest, in the world of 
privacy is a real concern. I think even a bigger concern than 
the European regulatory framework.
    So how should we be thinking about this and trying to help 
make sure that what we are doing with our allies is the 
standard that we think is appropriate for countries like ours 
that are democratic capitalist countries?
    Mr. Steyer. Senator Sullivan, if I may, just two points.
    Senator Sullivan. Please and I open this up to all.
    Mr. Steyer. A couple of points.
    One, when we wrote the California law last year, the CCPA, 
which we have been talking about in the hearing, we met the 
folks who wrote GDPR, and we realized that the values of the 
U.S. are in many ways similar to folks in the EU, but they are 
different in certain areas. So we were very careful--and I 
think that this could be done here at the Federal level as 
well--to think about how there are certain areas like the First 
Amendment--we were talking about this earlier--that may mean 
that a privacy law in the United States would be slightly 
different than GDPR. But most of the protections are universal.
    That said, you can modify----
    Senator Sullivan. Universal relative to liberal 
democracies?
    Mr. Steyer. That is what I was going to say.
    And the second thing is I would be willing to bet you a 
large sum of money that Huawei will not dominate the 5G 
universe, and I mean that.
    Senator Sullivan. Why? I am glad you are so optimistic.
    Mr. Steyer. Because the technology in the United States and 
the companies in the United States have brought this world 
extraordinary advances. That does not mean we do not need to be 
aware of this, but sacrificing important privacy protections 
for consumers just because China might do that would not be a 
smart strategy. And I think at the end of the day, a strong 
Federal privacy protection where the California law is the 
floor and where you really take into consideration the fact 
that most of the companies that matter are here in the United 
States will give us the protections that we need.
    Senator Sullivan. Other thoughts?
    Ms. Guliani. I was going to say, I mean, I think that we 
can take some good lessons from GDPR. Regulation in the U.S. is 
not going to look exactly the same as Europe. There are 
concerns with the right to be forgotten and changes that would 
need to be made to be consistent with the U.S. Constitution. 
The enforcement framework will look different. And also in the 
U.S., we have State-level actors, attorneys general, agencies, 
legislatures, and I think the last thing we want to do is 
weaken the ability of those actors who have a long history of 
working on these issues of sort of having a seat at the table 
and being able to enforce and create good laws.
    But having said that, there are positive elements of GDPR 
that we should take and learn from, the extent to which it 
places rights in the hands of consumers and increases standards 
around consent, and limits on how----
    Senator Sullivan. Let me just real quick and then I would 
like to hear the rest. But none of you are advocating for a 
state-by-state approach to this. Are you?
    Mr. Steyer. No, but we were very clear we have deep 
skepticism about preemption if there was going to be a watered-
down Federal law that would, say, lessen the protections you 
have at the baseline of California. So that was the discussion 
we had earlier.
    Mr. Polonetsky. Just to look to the Asia-Pacific allies 
that we do have. So we have had a leadership role in the APEC 
process where we have worked with Japan, Korea, a number of the 
major economies who similarly want to cooperate with data 
protection flows. You will be considering the new NAFTA treaty. 
We committed to use the APEC CBPRs, the APEC process to move 
data across North America. So GDPR, obviously, is an important 
place-setter, but we have been a leader in OECD, which has an 
important set of privacy frameworks, and we have been very 
active throughout many administrations in the APEC process, and 
those are two regimes we should look to for global cooperation.
    Senator Sullivan. Great.
    Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Sullivan.
    There is a vote on. Senator Cruz is recognized and will 
preside for a time. Senator Cruz.

                  STATEMENT OF HON. TED CRUZ, 
                    U.S. SENATOR FROM TEXAS

    Senator Cruz [presiding]. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Thank you to each of the witnesses for being here.
    There is no doubt that protecting privacy is critically 
important, and how we should do so, what government regulation 
should be in place concerning privacy is going to be a policy 
question that I suspect will be with us a very, very long time.
    At the same time that we want to protect privacy, we also 
want to avoid a regulatory system that imposes unnecessary 
burdens and that threatens jobs. And I think there are lessons 
that we can draw based on the experience we have seen 
elsewhere.
    There has been considerable discussion here about the 
European Union's General Data Protection Regulation, GDPR. In 
November 2018, the National Bureau of Economic Research found 
that, quote, the negative effects of GDPR on technology 
investment appear particularly pervasive for nascent 0 to 3-
year-old ventures, which may have cost European startups as 
many as 39,000 tech jobs.
    Even more alarming, the report goes on to state, quote, the 
potential for job losses may well extend and intensify past our 
four months post-GDPR dataset period, in which case the effects 
on jobs is understated.
    In the wake of GDPR, California enacted its own law, the 
California Consumer Privacy Act of 2018. And according to the 
International Association of Privacy Professionals, the 
California Privacy Act will affect more than 500,000 U.S. 
companies, the vast majority of which are small to medium sized 
enterprises.
    What lessons should this committee or should Congress take 
from the experience with GDPR and the experience with the 
California Privacy Act?
    Mr. Steyer. So, Senator Cruz, I am Jim Steyer and we 
basically wrote the California privacy law with the legislature 
there.
    I would tell you the bottom line lesson is that privacy is 
good for business. We wrote that law really with some of the 
most important tech companies in the United States, Apple, 
Microsoft, SalesForce. But I run a small business with several 
hundred employees. We have to comply with the California law 
and GDPR. And so I run a small business and know the fact that 
it does matter.
    But in the long run, I think what you saw was you had 
unanimous bipartisan support in California among all the 
Republican legislators, as well as Democratic legislators to 
support it.
    So I would just say well crafted, strong privacy 
protections are in the best interest of business. And I think 
that the record speaks for itself in that regard, and you 
should feel confident that a smart Congress, just like a smart 
California legislature, will find the right balance on that.
    Senator Cruz. So let me focus for a second on the GDPR 
piece. Do the witnesses agree that the GDPR regulation is 
having or had a significant negative effect on jobs? And are 
there lessons that we should derive from that?
    Mr. Polonetsky. I think, Senator, one easy lesson that we 
can take and improve on, as we look how to legislate in the 
GDPR, the European Data Protection Board is issuing quickly--
but frankly, it is a year in--opinions on some of the core 
protections of the GDPR. There is an opinion out now that is 
not yet final on what can be in a contract. And obviously, that 
is a core thing. Lots of companies are doing their business 
based on contract. And we will not have final guidance and it 
is a year out.
    So the more we can do to give clarity--here are the rules, 
and yes, there is room for rulemaking in the areas that are 
complex and they have not been figured out. But I should be 
able to comply the day the law passes. There is a real overhang 
of uncertainty in a number of areas where the board has yet to 
issue opinions so people actually know what the rules are.
    Ms. Guliani. And I do not think it is necessary that a 
privacy law is going to hurt small businesses. I do think that 
a law should reflect the realities of small businesses. So, for 
example, penalties. You might want to have different penalties 
based on the size of a business or the amount of data they 
hold.
    And I do think there are some rumors and myths around the 
extent to which GDPR harms some businesses. I will give you a 
good example that has been reported. Following GDPR, the ``New 
York Times'' reportedly stopped doing targeted advertising in 
Europe and did contextual advertising. They did not find that 
their advertising dollars went down. They went up. And so I do 
think that there are ways that businesses can respect privacy 
and make a profit. And we are starting to see businesses that 
are innovating around that. DuckDuckGo, who is trying to create 
an alternative to Google that respects privacy. So this is also 
an industry to, I think, promote privacy and create rights-
respecting products.
    Mr. Steyer. And, Senator Cruz, I would tell you that we 
have been spending a fair amount of time talking about the 
incredible importance to your family, my family, and everybody 
in this room's family, and ourselves about the protections. 
Living in the state where most of the big and small tech 
companies are based and working with them, I think they have 
now come to the conclusion that while there may be some 
modifications that need to be made, which is the normal 
legislative rulemaking process, in the long run this is good 
for business and it is good for consumers. It is good for 
everybody.
    So I agree with Ms. Guliani that I think some of the 
statements about job losses have been overstated and that the 
value of a quality privacy regime for the Cruz family, the 
Steyer family, and everybody else is totally worth it.
    Ms. Dixon. Senator, equally at the Irish Data Protection 
Commission, we are not aware of evidence that the GDPR is 
affecting jobs adversely. I spoke earlier about the risk-based 
approach that the GDPR endorses, and it does give a nod to 
smaller and micro-enterprises and it provides for 
implementation only of the organizational and technical 
measures that are appropriate and proportionate to the risks of 
the personal data processing operations in question and to the 
scale of the organization. So I think approached and 
implemented as it is intended, it should do the opposite of 
affect jobs. It should engender better consumer trust and a 
more sustainable business model.
    Senator Cruz. Well, I want to thank each of the witnesses 
for your testimony. This testimony has been helpful.
    The hearing record will remain open for two weeks. During 
that time, Senators are asked to submit any questions for the 
record. And upon receipt, the witnesses are requested to submit 
their written answers to the Committee as soon as possible, but 
no later than Wednesday, May 15, 2019.
    With that, I thank each of the witnesses for testifying, 
and the hearing is adjourned.
    [Whereupon, at 12:05 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

                            A P P E N D I X

    Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Jerry Moran to 
                              Helen Dixon
    Question 1. Your testimony highlighted obligations placed on 
organizations operating under the GDPR as a ``series of high-level, 
technology neutral principles,'' such as lawfulness, fairness, and 
transparency, among many others. Would you please explain the 
significance of any future regulatory privacy framework maintaining a 
technology neutral approach?
    Answer. The significance of a technology-neutral approach in any 
future regulatory privacy framework is that the law would remain 
adaptable to govern any type of personal data processing scenario and 
in any context. Equally, the law would not require frequent updating to 
keep pace with technology and terminology changes in addition to 
obsolescence that cannot easily be anticipated in advance.
    The flip-side of this capability of the law to remain adaptive to 
new technologies is that, in enforcing the law, supervisory authorities 
cannot start from a point where they are applying a very prescriptive 
and context-specific standard set down in the law. Rather, enforcers 
must go back to first principles and examine the technological features 
and context of any given set of personal data processing operations and 
decide whether there is compliance with the principles. So, for 
example, facial recognition as a technology is not referenced directly 
in the GDPR and nor are any use cases involving facial recognition 
prohibited. The enforcer in examining a complaint about facial 
recognition would have to examine whether the requirements and 
conditions for processing of special categories of data (biometric data 
is a special category under GDPR) are met in each very specific 
implementation context. This means investigations of issues require the 
time for in-context analysis prior to any enforcement action.

    Question 2. Your testimony briefly described the ``rights of 
consumers'' set out in Chapter 3 of GDPR, and you specifically 
mentioned the ``varying conditions pertaining to the circumstances. . 
.[that] those rights can be exercised.'' Based on your interpretation 
of the right to data portability, are there unique circumstances or 
factors that determine when this particular right should be exercised? 
Are there certain circumstances in which portability requests are not 
appropriate to execute?
    a. Given relevant competition concerns inherent in the portability 
requirement, are there special considerations taken into account for 
compliance determinations in regards to the right?
    Answer. The reference to the varying conditions under which the 
right to portability can be exercised was a reference to the fact that 
it applies only to data which has been collected under the legal bases 
of consent or contract. It applies only to the personal data provided 
directly by the user or to observed data flowing from the user actions. 
It does not apply to inferred data. I attach for the Senator's 
information an opinion of the European Data Protection Board 
interpreting and clarifying the right to portability which may be 
useful.
    An aim of the right is that it will ultimately lead to the 
fostering of more consumer services and choice for users. Any scenario 
where an organisation asserts a commercial or confidentiality 
sensitivity or a risk of prejudicing of third party rights in 
delivering portability would be examined on its merits by the Data 
Protection Commission.
    We are certainly in the early days with regard to full 
implementation of this right. Early initiatives such as this one 
implemented by some of the major platforms shows the direction of 
travel to-date with online service providers:
    https://datatransferproject.dev/

    Question 3. In March, my Subcommittee on Consumer Protection held a 
hearing focused on the specific concerns of small and new businesses 
that operate in different sectors and how they utilize and protect 
consumer information in their operations. These businesses have fewer 
resources in handling the complexities of increased regulatory privacy 
compliance and associated costs. Additionally, not all businesses are 
the same, and consumer data offers different uses, challenges and, in 
some cases, liabilities, across the various models of small businesses 
and start-ups. How does the Irish Data Protection Commission account 
for small and new businesses in its enforcement actions aligned with 
GDPR?
    Answer. SMEs (Small and Medium Enterprises) make up over 99 percent 
of businesses in Ireland with a significant proportion of that figure 
being categorised as micro enterprises. It was therefore a considerable 
focus of the Irish Data Protection Commission in the run-up to the 
application of the GDPR in May 2018 to ensure that small business 
concerns were addressed and that they was clarity in terms of what was 
anticipated regarding their implementation of GDPR.
    A year prior application (May 2017), the Data Protection Commission 
procured an independent survey of small businesses to assess their 
level of awareness and understanding of the new law. This allowed us 
focus our support initiatives in specific ways. We engaged extensively 
with representative bodies of small businesses and worked with them on 
drawing up and publishing and promoting simple ``12 Step Guides'' on 
how to commence preparations. We developed a micro site (now removed) 
www.gdprandyou.ie which we populated with guidance materials. We 
engaged with specific sectors directly through seminars and workshops 
clarifying the risk-based approach endorsed by the GDPR. The Data 
Protection Commission rolled out an extensive media campaign that also 
covered cinemas in Ireland to promote awareness and to direct small 
business owners to our micro website. We increased staffing on our 
caller helpline in order to be available to answer queries from small 
businesses directly.
    When we re-ran the survey with SMEs in March 2018, awareness levels 
had jumped significantly and small business confidence in preparation 
for the new law had increased considerably.
    In terms of the fact that small businesses vary greatly from one 
another as conerns their types of data use, we communicated heavily 
that the approach that needs to be taken starts with a risk-assessment 
and ultimately implements organisational and technical measures 
appropriate to the risk. Several of the provisions of the GDPR in many 
cases do not apply to small businesses: for example, the Article 30 
requirement to document data processing activities or the Article 37 
requirement to appoint a Data Protection Officer may equally not apply.
    In terms of enforcement, the Irish Data Protection Commission 
mirrors the risk-based approach of the GDPR and targets enforcement 
activity at the areas of highest risk and which impact the most users. 
In the majority of cases currently involving smaller businesses, we 
will seek to mediate between a complainant and the business to amicably 
resolve any complaints about data protection we receive, ensuring as we 
do to educate the small business on where its compliance efforts may 
need to be stepped up.
                                 ______
                                 
    Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Jerry Moran to 
                            Jules Polonetsky
    Question 1. Are you concerned that overly broad purpose limitations 
could negatively impact research, including research related to 
artificial intelligence?
    a. Do you have similar concerns about overly broad consumer 
deletion rights?
    Answer. Thank you for considering the many beneficial opportunities 
to use some types of data for research purposes. General agreement on 
use limitations commonly allows for the inclusion of research for 
product improvement and related product development as ``reasonable 
expectations,'' which in recent years may include research, training or 
testing on machine learning models. We see this at an increasing rate 
as more and more products, services, features, and new technological 
capabilities are built on AI and ML systems.
    Research conducted to develop or improve entirely new or unrelated 
products is arguably not expected in this sense, and could be beyond 
the scope of what a consumer intended when originally providing the 
data. This might be particularly true for data processed using machine 
learning, as it may not be possible to identify sufficiently broad 
secondary use cases at the time of collection. In some cases, data may 
be de-identified, but in other situations this may not be feasible. In 
some circumstances, the new use creates no risk to individuals and 
should not be of concern. This is where an ethics review process, 
recognized by law, would be valuable. For example, for researchers 
subject to the Common Rule, this use of data for academic human subject 
search would go through review by an Institutional Review Board, where 
informed consent might be required as well as other protections. Or the 
Board might waive consent, after weighing the risks, benefits, and 
ethical concerns. FPF and other leading scholars have called for the 
creation of such review processes, which can be used by companies and 
academics conducting research on data that is outside the Common Rule 
IRB framework. We believe such a trusted process will be essential for 
assessing uses of data when informed consent is not feasible.
    Thank you for asking about an important aspect of many privacy laws 
and bills, which provide consumers with the opportunity to delete their 
data in appropriate contexts. In some cases, this is not an option. 
Based on existing regulatory requirements, a bank customer cannot 
request deletion of his bank records, even if he closes his account. 
Likewise, academic, medical, and other business related records may 
have independent requirements that limit a consumer's right in this 
area. When this is the case, sufficient leeway should limit the 
deletion rights to allow necessary retention. In other cases, for 
example, engagement with social media, or other discretionary 
interactions with individual organizations, an individual should 
reasonably be able to delete her information and rely on that erasure. 
To the extent that such data has already been included in aggregated or 
de-identified datasets, there should be no conflict between the 
deletion of personal data, and the retention of those datasets for 
further analysis or use to train machine learning models. In addition, 
the requirements for sufficient breadth and diversity of data in these 
training datasets might be impacted (that is, they may become 
unacceptably biased, or insufficiently representative) if individual 
records are required to be removed. In cases of particularly sensitive 
data where removal of an individual's record might be desired or 
required, additional strategies could be employed to ensure the 
validity of the dataset is retained. An example would be applying 
differential privacy strategies, which allow evaluation of a dataset 
both with, and without, an individual record, to ensure that analysis 
on that dataset remains consistent.

    Question 2. Your testimony thoroughly describes ten privacy-
enhancing technologies, or PETs, that can ``achieve strong and provable 
privacy guarantees while still supporting beneficial uses'' of data. Do 
you have specific recommendations for this Committee as to how Federal 
legislation could incentivize the growth and development of new PETs?
    Answer. Thank you for asking about the benefits of privacy-
enhancing technologies (PETs). Providing organizations with incentives 
to implement PETs is one of the most important things a Federal privacy 
law can do to improve consumer privacy while promoting beneficial uses 
of data. There are several legislative tools that could provide 
incentives for organizations to employ PETs.
    FPF has proposed that legislation recognize several tiers of 
personal information and tailor resulting rights and obligations based 
on the identifiability of the data, given the technical and legal 
controls that are applied. We propose a strong standard for covered 
data that would include a broad range of data that is linked or can 
practicably by linked to an individual. Within this range, we propose 
that lawmakers can provide for a degree of latitude for compatible uses 
when data is pseudonymized and non-sensitive. When data is 
pseudonymized and sensitive, we suggest that there be some but less 
latitude. Finally, we recognize that some technical methods can result 
in data being considered de-identified. These tiers would provide 
incentives for companies to apply technical de-identification to data, 
as opposed to binary proposals that treat data as either included or 
excluded from regulation.
    In addition to nuanced legislative definitions, a Federal privacy 
law can provide other direct incentives to employ PETs:

   A law could create safe harbors for certain PETs-protected 
        activities. For example, a law could designate some data as 
        ``not identifiable'' (and thus subject to few or no consent 
        obligations) when the organization employs on-device 
        differential privacy to ensure that aggregate data about user 
        behavior cannot be reliably linked to individuals.

   A law could create rebuttable presumptions regarding data 
        safeguarded by PETs. For example, a law could establish a 
        presumption that an organization meets the law's security 
        requirements with regard to data that is encrypted using robust 
        cryptography and also protected by a comprehensive data 
        security program.

   A law could reduce some legal obligations in order to 
        promote practical privacy protections. For example, a law could 
        reduce transparency or choice requirements when organizations 
        use homomorphic encryption to reduce or eliminate third 
        parties' ability to identify individuals during routine 
        commercial transactions like retail purchases, online 
        advertising, or marketing attribution.

    In addition to providing the FTC with greater enforcement 
resources, a Federal law can direct additional funding to the FTC's 
Office of Technology Research and Investigation. As a key part of the 
FTC's education efforts for legal compliance, especially for small 
businesses, the FTC should also research emerging de-identification 
technologies in order to be aware of their strengths and weaknesses, 
and hold workshops that provide opportunities for discussion and debate 
over the efficacy of emerging PETs.
                                 ______
                                 
     Response to Written Question Submitted by Hon. Jerry Moran to 
                          Neema Singh Guliani
    Question. Similar to what your testimony stated, I have heard from 
many interested parties that the FTC currently lacks the resources 
needed to effectively enforce consumer privacy under its current 
Section 5 authorities. As a member of the Senate Appropriations 
Subcommittee with jurisdiction over the FTC, I am particularly 
interested in understanding the resource needs of the agency based on 
its current authorities, particularly before providing additional 
authorities. Do you have specific resource-based recommendations for 
this committee to ensure that the FTC has the appropriations it needs 
to execute its current enforcement mission?
    Answer. The FTC needs additional resources for enforcement to 
enable it to act as an effective watchdog. In the last 20 years, the 
number of employees at the FTC has grown only slightly. And the number 
of employees in the Division of Privacy and Identity Protection (DPIP) 
and the Division of Enforcement, which are responsible for the agency's 
privacy and data security work, stands at approximately 50 and 44 
people, respectively. In addition, the FTC needs additional technical 
expertise, so that it can adapt to changes in technology. For example, 
technologists and academics have found that advertising companies 
``innovate'' in online tracking technologies to resist consumers' 
attempts to defeat that tracking, frequently using new, relatively 
unknown technologies. It is unclear whether the agency has the 
technical capacity to keep pace with such innovations. A more detailed 
review of how the commission is currently allocating its existing 
resources is needed to assess whether there are additional areas where 
existing resources should be augmented.

                                  [all]

