
 - MASS VIOLENCE, EXTREMISM, AND DIGITAL RESPONSIBILITY

[Senate Hearing 116-609]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]




                                                        S. Hrg. 116-609

                       MASS VIOLENCE, EXTREMISM, 
                       AND DIGITAL RESPONSIBILITY

=======================================================================

                                HEARING

                               before the

                         COMMITTEE ON COMMERCE,
                      SCIENCE, AND TRANSPORTATION
                          UNITED STATES SENATE

                     ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

                             FIRST SESSION

                               __________

                           SEPTEMBER 18, 2019

                               __________

    Printed for the use of the Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
                             Transportation





                  [GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]






                Available online: http://www.govinfo.gov





                               ______
                                 

                 U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

52-751 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2023













       SENATE COMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, SCIENCE, AND TRANSPORTATION

                     ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

                             FIRST SESSION

                  ROGER WICKER, Mississippi, Chairman

JOHN THUNE, South Dakota             MARIA CANTWELL, Washington, 
ROY BLUNT, Missouri                      Ranking
TED CRUZ, Texas                      AMY KLOBUCHAR, Minnesota
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska                RICHARD BLUMENTHAL, Connecticut
JERRY MORAN, Kansas                  BRIAN SCHATZ, Hawaii
DAN SULLIVAN, Alaska                 EDWARD MARKEY, Massachusetts
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               TOM UDALL, New Mexico
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          GARY PETERS, Michigan
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
MIKE LEE, Utah                       TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
RON JOHNSON, Wisconsin               JON TESTER, Montana
TODD YOUNG, Indiana                  KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
RICK SCOTT, Florida                  JACKY ROSEN, Nevada

                       John Keast, Staff Director
                  Crystal Tully, Deputy Staff Director
                      Steven Wall, General Counsel
                 Kim Lipsky, Democratic Staff Director
              Chris Day, Democratic Deputy Staff Director
                      Renae Black, Senior Counsel








                            C O N T E N T S

                              ----------                              
                                                                   Page
Hearing held on September 18, 2019...............................     1
Statement of Senator Wicker......................................     1
Statement of Senator Cantwell....................................     3
Statement of Senator Fischer.....................................    36
Statement of Senator Blumenthal..................................    38
Statement of Senator Thune.......................................    39
Statement of Senator Blackburn...................................    41
Statement of Senator Scott.......................................    43
Statement of Senator Duckworth...................................    45
Statement of Senator Young.......................................    48
Statement of Senator Rosen.......................................    51
Statement of Senator Lee.........................................    52
Statement of Senator Baldwin.....................................    54
Statement of Senator Sullivan....................................    56
Statement of Senator Cruz........................................    58

                               Witnesses

Monika Bickert, Vice President for Global Policy Management and 
  Counterterrorism, Facebook.....................................     4
    Prepared statement...........................................     6
Nick Pickles, Director, Public Policy Strategy, Twitter, Inc.....     8
    Prepared statement...........................................    10
Derek Slater, Global Director, Information Policy, Google LLC....    15
    Prepared statement...........................................    17
George Selim, Senior Vice President, National Programs, ADL 
  (Anti-Defamation League).......................................    19
    Prepared statement...........................................    21

                                Appendix

Letter dated September 16, 2019 to Chairman Roger Wicker and 
  Ranking Member Maria Cantwell from Gretchen Peters, Executive 
  Director, and Dr. Amr Al-Azm, Co-founder, Director of ATHAR 
  Project, Alliance to Counter Crime Online......................    63
Letter dated September 17, 2019 to Mark Zuckerberg, Chief 
  Executive Officer, and Sheryl Sandberg, Chief Operating 
  Officer, Facebook; Jack Dorsey, Chief Executive Officer, 
  Twitter; Sundar Pichai, Chief Executive Officer, Google; and 
  Susan Wojcicki, Chief Executive Officer, YouTube from The 
  Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights, Color Of 
  Change, Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights Under Law, Muslim 
  Advocates, and NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc...    64
Response to written questions submitted to Monika Bickert by:
    Hon. Shelley Moore Capito....................................    66
    Hon. Amy Klobuchar...........................................    67
    Hon. Richard Blumenthal......................................    68
    Hon. Tom Udall...............................................    70
    Hon. Jacky Rosen.............................................    75
Response to written questions submitted to Nick Pickles by:
    Hon. Shelley Moore Capito....................................    76
    Hon. Richard Blumenthal......................................    77
    Hon. Tom Udall...............................................    80
    Hon. Jacky Rosen.............................................    83
Response to written questions submitted to Derek Slater by:
    Hon. Shelley Moore Capito....................................    85
    Hon. Richard Blumenthal......................................    86
    Hon. Tom Udall...............................................    89
    Hon. Jacky Rosen.............................................    91
Response to written questions submitted to George Selim by:
    Hon. Richard Blumenthal......................................    93
    Hon. Tom Udall...............................................    95
    Hon. Jacky Rosen.............................................    95







 
                       MASS VIOLENCE, EXTREMISM, 
                       AND DIGITAL RESPONSIBILITY

                              ----------                              


                     WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 18, 2019

                                       U.S. Senate,
        Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation,
                                                    Washington, DC.
    The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m., in room 
SH-216, Hart Senate Office Building, Hon. Roger Wicker, 
Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
    Present: Senators Wicker [presiding], Thune, Cruz, Fischer, 
Sullivan, Blackburn, Young, Capito, Lee, Scott, Cantwell, 
Blumenthal, Udall, Duckworth, and Rosen.

            OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ROGER WICKER, 
                 U.S. SENATOR FROM MISSISSIPPI

    The Chairman. Today the Committee gathers to discuss what 
the technology industry is doing to remove violent and 
extremist content from their platforms. This is a matter of 
serious importance to the safety and well-being of our Nation's 
communities. I sincerely hope we can engage in a collaborative 
discussion about what more can be done, within the jurisdiction 
of this committee, to keep our communities safe from those 
wishing to do us harm. Today, we welcome representatives from 
the world's largest social media companies and online 
platforms.
    We will hear from Ms. Monika Bickert, Head of the Global 
Policy Management for Facebook, and Mr. Nick Pickles, Public 
Policy Director at Twitter, Mr. Derek Slater, Global Director 
of Information Policy at Google, and Mr. George Selim, Senior 
Vice President of Programs for the Anti-Defamation League. Over 
the past two decades, the United States has led the world in 
the development of social media and other services that allow 
people to connect with one another.
    Open platform providers like Google, Twitter, and Facebook 
and products like Instagram and YouTube have dramatically 
changed the way we communicate and have been used positively in 
providing spaces for like-minded groups to come together and in 
shedding light on despotic regimes and abuses of power 
throughout the world. No matter how great the benefits to 
society these platforms provide, it is important to consider 
how they can be used for evil at home and abroad. On August 3, 
2019, 20 people were killed, and more than two dozen were 
injured in a mass shooting at an El Paso shopping center. 
Police have said that they are reasonably confident that the 
suspect posted a manifesto to a website called 8chan, 27 
minutes prior to the shooting. 8chan moderators removed the 
original post, though users continued sharing copies.
    Following the shooting, President Trump called on social 
media companies to work in partnership with local, State, and 
Federal agencies to develop tools that can detect mass shooters 
before they strike--I certainly hope we talk about that 
challenge today. Sadly, the El Paso shooting is not the only 
recent example of mass violence with an online dimension.
    On March 15, 2019, 51 people were killed and 49 were 
injured in shootings at two mosques in Christchurch, New 
Zealand. The perpetrator filmed the attacks using a body camera 
and live-streamed the footage to his Facebook followers, who 
began to re-upload the footage to Facebook and other sites. 
Access to the footage quickly spread and Facebook stated that 
it removed 1.5 million videos of the massacre within 24 hours 
of the attack. 1.2 million views of the videos were blocked 
before they could be uploaded. Like the El Paso shooter, the 
Christchurch shooter also uploaded a manifesto to 8chan. The 
2016 shooting at the Pulse Nightclub in Orlando, Florida, 
killed 49 and injured 53 more. The Orlando shooter was 
reportedly radicalized by ISIS and other jihadist propaganda 
through online sources. Days after the attack, the FBI Director 
stated that investigators were highly confident that the 
shooter was self-radicalized through the internet.
    According to an official involved in the investigation, 
analysis of the shooter's electronic devices revealed that he 
had consumed ``a hell of a lot of jihadist propaganda,'' 
including ISIS beheading videos. Shooting survivors and family 
members of victims brought a Federal lawsuit against those 
three social media platforms under the Anti-Terrorism Act. The 
Sixth Circuit dismissed the lawsuit on the grounds that this 
was not an act of international terrorism. With over 3.2 
billion Internet users, this committee recognizes the challenge 
facing social media companies and online platforms and their 
ability to act and remove content threatening violence from 
their sites.
    There are questions about tracking of a users' online 
activity: does this invade an individual's privacy, thwart due 
process, or violate constitutional rights? The automatic 
removal of threatening content may also impact an online 
platform's ability to detect possible warning signs. Indeed, 
the First Amendment offers strong protections against 
restricting certain speech. This undeniably adds to the 
complexity of our task. I hope these witnesses will speak to 
these challenges and how their companies are navigating these 
challenges. In today's internet-connected society, 
misinformation, fake news, deep fakes, and viral online 
conspiracy theories have become the norm. This hearing is an 
opportunity for witnesses to discuss how their platforms go 
about identifying content and material that threatens violence 
and poses a real and potentially immediate danger to the 
public.
    I hope our witnesses will also discuss how their content 
moderation processes work. This includes addressing how human 
review or technological tools are employed to remove or 
otherwise limit violent content before it is posted, copied, 
and disseminated across the internet. Communication with law 
enforcement officials at the Federal, State, and local levels 
is critical to protecting our neighborhoods and communities. We 
would like to know how companies are coordinating with law 
enforcement when violent or extremist content is identified.
    And finally, I hope witnesses will discuss how Congress can 
assist in ongoing efforts to remove content promoting violence 
from online platforms and whether best practices or industry 
codes of conduct in this area would help increase safety, both 
online and offline. So, I look forward to hearing testimonies 
from our witnesses, and hope we engage in a constructive 
discussion about potential solutions to a pressing issue. And I 
am delighted at this point to recognize my friend and Ranking 
Member, Senator Cantwell.

               STATEMENT OF HON. MARIA CANTWELL, 
                  U.S. SENATOR FROM WASHINGTON

    Senator Cantwell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you 
for holding this important hearing and for our witnesses being 
here this morning. Across the country, we are seeing and 
experiencing a surge of hate and as a result we need to think 
much harder about the tools and resources we have to combat 
this problem both online and offline. While the First Amendment 
to the Constitution protects free speech, speech that incites 
eminent violence is not protected, and Congress should review 
and strengthen laws that prohibit threats of violence, 
harassment, stalking, and intimidation to make sure that we 
stop the online behavior that does incite violence.
    In testimony before the Senate Judiciary Committee in July, 
Federal Bureau of Investigation FBI Director Chris Wray said 
that the white supremacist violence is on the rise. He said the 
FBI takes this threat ``extremely seriously,'' and has made 
over 100 arrests so far this year. We are seeing in my state 
over the last several years, we have suffered a shooting at the 
Jewish community center in Seattle, a shooting of a Sikh in 
Kent, Washington, a bombing attempt at the Martin Luther King 
Day parade in Spokane, and over the last year, we have seen a 
rise in the desecration of both synagogues and mosques. The 
rise in hate across the country has also led to multiple mass 
shootings, including the Tree of Life congregation in 
Pittsburgh, the Pulse nightclub in Orlando, and most recently, 
the Walmart in El Paso.
    Social media is used to amplify that hate and the shooter 
at one high school in the Parkland posting said the image of 
himself with guns and knives on Instagram wrote social media 
posts prior to the attack on his fellow students. In El Paso, 
the killer published a white supremacist anti-immigration 
manifesto on a 8chan message board, and my colleague just 
mentioned this streaming of live content related to the 
Christchurch shooting and the horrific incidents that happened 
there. In Miramar, the military engaged in a systematic 
campaign on Facebook, using fake names and sham accounts to 
promote violence against Muslim Rohingya. These human lives 
were all cut short by deep hatred and extremism that we have 
seen has become more common.
    This is a particular problem on the dark web, where we see 
certain websites like 8chan and a host of 24/7, 365 hate 
rallies. Adding technology tools to mainstream websites to stop 
the spread of these dark websites are a start, but there needs 
to be more to be a comprehensive and coordinated effort to 
ensure that people are not directed into these cesspools. I 
believe calling on the Department of Justice to make sure that 
we are working across the board on an international basis with 
companies as well to fight this issue is an important thing to 
be done. We do not want to push people off of social media 
platforms only to then being on the dark web, where we are 
finding less of them. We need to do more at the Department of 
Justice to shut down these dark websites, and social media 
companies need to work with us to make sure that we are doing 
this. I do want to mention, just last week, as there is much 
discussion here in Washington about initiatives.
    The State of Washington has passed three gun initiatives by 
the vote of the people, closing background loopholes, and also 
relating to private sales and extreme person laws, all voted on 
by a majority of people in our state and successfully passed. 
So I do appreciate, just last week representatives from various 
companies of all sizes in the tech industry sending the Senate 
a letter, asking for passage of bills requiring extensive 
background checks.
    So very much appreciate that and your support of extreme 
person laws to keep guns out of the hands of people who a court 
has determined are dangerous in the possession of that. So this 
morning, we look forward to asking you about ways in which we 
can better fight these issues. I do want us to think about ways 
in which we can all work together to address these issues. I 
feel that working together, these are successful tools that we 
can deploy in trying to fight extremism that exists online. 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the hearing.
    The Chairman. Thank you, very, very much. And now we will 
hear oral testimony from our four witnesses. And we ask you--
your entire statements will be submitted for the record, 
without objection. We ask you to limit your comments at this 
point to five minutes. Ms. Bickert, you are recognized. Thank 
you for being here.

 STATEMENT OF MONIKA BICKERT, VICE PRESIDENT FOR GLOBAL POLICY 
           MANAGEMENT AND COUNTERTERRORISM, FACEBOOK

    Ms. Bickert. Thank you, Chairman Wicker, Ranking Member 
Cantwell, and distinguished members of the Committee. Thank you 
for the opportunity to be here today, and to answer your 
questions and explain our efforts in these areas. My name is 
Monika Bickert and I am Facebook's Vice President for Global 
Policy Management and Counterterrorism. I am responsible for 
our rules around content on Facebook and our company's response 
to terrorist with the intent to use our services. On behalf of 
everyone at Facebook, I would like to begin by expressing my 
sympathy and solidarity with the victims, families, 
communities, and everybody affected by the recent terrible 
attacks across the country.
    In the face of such heinous acts, we remain committed to 
assisting law enforcement and standing with the community 
against hate and violence. We are thankful to be able to 
provide a way for those affected by this horrific violence to 
communicate with loved ones, organize events for people to 
gather and grieve, raise money to help support communities, and 
begin to heal.
    Our mission is to give people the power to connect with one 
another and to build community. But we know that people need to 
be safe in order to build that community. And that is why we 
have rules in place against harmful conduct including hate 
speech and inciting violence. Our goal is to ensure that 
Facebook is both a place where people can express themselves, 
but where they are also safe.
    While we are not aware of any connection between the recent 
attacks and our platform, we certainly recognize that we all 
have a role to play in keeping our community safe. That is why 
we remove content that encourages real-world harm, this 
includes contents that is involving violence or incitement, 
promoting or publicizing crime, coordinating harmful 
activities, or encouraging suicide or self-injury. We do not 
allow any individuals or organizations who proclaim a violent 
mission, advocate for violence, or are engaged in violence to 
have any presence on Facebook, even if they are talking about 
something unrelated, this includes organizations and 
individuals involved in or advocating for terror activity, 
domestic and international, organized hate and that includes 
white supremacy, white separatism, or white nationalism, or 
other violence.
    We also do not allow any content posted by anyone that 
praises or supports these individuals, organizations, or their 
actions. When we find content that violates our standards, we 
remove it promptly, we also disable accounts when we see severe 
or repeated violations, and we work with law enforcement 
directly when we believe there is a risk of physical harm or a 
direct threat to public safety. While there is always room for 
improvement, we already remove millions of pieces of content 
every year for violating our policies and much of that is 
before anybody has reported it to us. Our efforts to improve 
our enforcement of these policies are focused in three areas.
    First, building new technical solutions that allow us to 
proactively identify content that violates our policies. 
Second, investing in people who can help us implement these 
policies. At Facebook, we now have more than 30,000 people 
across the company who are working on safety and security 
efforts, this includes more than 350 people whose primary focus 
is counterhate and counterterrorism.
    And third, building partnerships with other companies, 
civil society, researchers, and Governments so that together we 
can come up with shared solutions. We are proud of the work we 
have done thus far to make Facebook a hostile place for those 
engaged in or advocating for acts of violence, but the work 
will never be complete.
    We know that bad actors will continue to attempt to skirt 
detection with more sophisticated efforts, and we are dedicated 
to continuing to advance our work and show our progress. We 
look forward to working with the Committee, regulators, others 
in the tech industry, and civil society to continue this 
progress.
    Again, I appreciate the opportunity to be here today, and I 
look forward to your questions. Thank you.
    [The prepared statement of Ms. Bickert follows:]

Prepared Statement of Monika Bickert, Vice President for Global Policy 
               Management and Counterterrorism, Facebook
I. Introduction
    Chairman Wicker, Ranking Member Cantwell, and distinguished members 
of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you 
today. My name is Monika Bickert, and I am the Vice President of Global 
Policy Management and Counterterrorism at Facebook. In that role, I 
lead our efforts related to Product Policy and Counterterrorism. Prior 
to assuming my current role, I served as lead security counsel for 
Facebook, working on issues ranging from children's safety to 
interactions with law enforcement. And before that, I was a criminal 
prosecutor with the Department of Justice for 11 years in Chicago and 
Washington, DC, where I prosecuted Federal crimes including public 
corruption and gang violence.
    On behalf of everyone at Facebook, I would like to express our 
sympathy and solidarity with the victims, families, communities, and 
everyone else affected by the recent terrible attacks across the 
country. In the face of such heinous acts, we remain committed to 
cooperating with law enforcement and standing with our community 
against hate and violence. We are thankful to be able to provide a way 
for those affected by the horrific recent attacks to communicate with 
loved ones, to organize events for people to gather and grieve, and to 
raise money to help support these communities as they begin to heal.
    Facebook's mission is to give people the power to build community 
and bring the world closer together. We are proud that more than two 
billion people around the world come to Facebook every month to connect 
and share with one another. But people need to feel safe in order to 
build this community. That is why Facebook prohibits harmful conduct on 
its platform, including hate speech and inciting violence. Our goal is 
to ensure that Facebook is a place where both expression and personal 
safety are protected and respected.
    We are not aware of any connection between our platform and the 
recent attacks, but we recognize that we all have a role to play in 
keeping our communities safe. At Facebook, we have strong policies and 
invest significant resources to protect our users on and offline.
II. Facebook's Policies Against Hate and Violence
    Facebook is committed to protecting our community by removing any 
content from our services that encourages real-world harm. Because 
harmful content can take many forms, we have several policies in place 
to address these issues, all of which are published in our Community 
Standards, which define the content that is and is not allowed on our 
platform.
    When we find content that violates our standards, we remove it. We 
invest in technology, processes, and people to help us identify 
violations and act quickly to mitigate any impact. There is always room 
for improvement, but we remove millions of pieces of content every 
year, much of it before any user reports it. We outline below several 
of the important steps that we take to prevent violence and keep our 
users safe.
    Prohibition Against Violence and Incitement: We care deeply about 
our users and we want them to be safe. Therefore, it is critical to our 
mission to help prevent potential offline harm that may be related to 
content on Facebook. We remove content, disable accounts, and work with 
law enforcement when we believe there is a risk of physical harm or 
direct threats to public safety.
    Prohibition of Dangerous Individuals and Organizations: In an 
effort to prevent and disrupt real-world harm, we do not allow any 
individuals or organizations that proclaim a violent mission, advocate 
violence, or are engaged in violence to have a presence on Facebook for 
any purpose, even if it appears benign. This includes organizations or 
individuals involved in the following:

   Terrorist activity, both domestic and international;

   Organized hate, including white supremacy and white 
        nationalism;

   Human trafficking; and

   Organized violence or criminal activity.

    We do not allow propaganda or symbols that represent any of these 
organizations or individuals to be shared on our platform unless they 
are being used to condemn or inform--for example, by media 
organizations. We do not allow content that praises any of these 
organizations or individuals or any acts committed by them. And we do 
not allow coordination of support for any of these organizations or 
individuals or any acts committed by them.
    No Promoting or Publicizing Crime: We prohibit people from 
promoting or publicizing violent crime, theft, and/or fraud because we 
do not want to condone this activity and because there is a risk of 
copycat behavior. We also do not allow people to depict criminal 
activity or admit to crimes they or their associates have committed.
    Policies Against Coordinating Harm: In an effort to prevent and 
disrupt real-world harm, we prohibit people from facilitating or 
coordinating future activity, criminal or otherwise, that is intended 
or likely to cause harm to people, businesses, or animals. People can 
draw attention to harmful activity that they may witness or experience 
as long as they do not advocate for or coordinate harm.
    Combatting Suicide and Self-Injury: We also use and continue to 
develop tools and resources to proactively identify and help people who 
may be at risk of suicide or self-injury. We leverage pattern 
recognition technology to detect posts or live videos where someone 
might be expressing an intent to harm themselves. We also use 
artificial intelligence (AI) to prioritize the order in which our team 
reviews reported content relating to suicide or self-injury. This 
ensures we can get the right resources to people in distress and, where 
appropriate, we can more quickly alert first responders. And we remove 
content that encourages suicide or self-injury, including certain 
graphic imagery and real-time depictions that experts tell us might 
lead others to engage in similar behavior. We also work with 
organizations around the world to provide assistance and resources to 
people in distress.
    Cooperation with Law Enforcement: Law enforcement plays a critical 
role in keeping people safe, and we have a long history of working 
successfully with law enforcement to address a wide variety of threats. 
As a former Federal prosecutor, I know that this cooperation is vital. 
When we do receive reports or otherwise find content that violates our 
policies, we remove it. And we proactively reach out to law enforcement 
if we see a credible threat of imminent harm.
III. Facebook's Efforts to Combat Violence and Hate
    Our efforts to combat violent and hateful content are focused in 
three areas: developing new technical capabilities for our products, 
investing in people, and building partnerships.
    Product Enhancements: Facebook has invested significantly in 
technology to help meet the challenge of proactively identifying 
violent content, including through the use of AI and other automation. 
These technologies have become increasingly central to keeping hateful 
and violent content off of Facebook.
    We use a wide range of technical tools to identify violent and 
hateful content. This includes hashes--or digital fingerprints--that 
allow us to find secondary versions of known bad content; text parsing; 
digital ``fan-outs'' to identify profiles, groups, and pages related to 
those we have identified as problematic; and more holistic machine 
learning that can assess all aspects of a post and score whether it is 
likely to violate our Community Standards.
    We also know that bad actors adapt as technology evolves, and that 
is why we constantly update our technical solutions to deal with more 
types of content in more languages, and to react to the new ways our 
adversaries try to exploit our products. For example, in response to 
the tragic events in Christchurch, we made changes to Facebook Live to 
restrict users if they have violated certain rules--including our 
Dangerous Organizations and Individuals policy. We now apply a ``one-
strike'' policy to Live: anyone who violates our most serious policies 
will be restricted from using Live for set periods of time--for 
example, 30 days--starting on their first offense. We have also updated 
our proactive detection systems and reduced the average time it takes 
for our AI to find a violation on Facebook Live to 12 seconds--a 90 
percent reduction in our average detection time from a few months ago. 
Being able to detect violations sooner means that in emergencies where 
every minute counts, we can assist faster.
    Investments in People: We know that we cannot rely on AI alone to 
identify potentially violent content. Context often matters. To 
understand more nuanced cases, we need human expertise.
    One of our greatest human resources is our community of users. Our 
users help us by reporting accounts or content that may violate our 
policies--including the small fraction that may be related to acts of 
violence. To review those reports, and to prioritize the safety of our 
users and our platform more generally, we have more than 30,000 people 
working on safety and security across the company and around the world. 
That is three times as many people as we had dedicated to such efforts 
in 2017. Our safety and security professionals review reported content 
in more than 50 languages, 24 hours a day.
    We also have a team of more than 350 people at Facebook whose 
primary job is dealing with terrorists and other Dangerous Individuals 
and Organizations. This team includes language and cultural 
specialists, former law enforcement and intelligence professionals, and 
academics that have studied these groups and individuals for years. 
Many of them came to Facebook specifically because they are committed 
to the mission of keeping people safe.
    This team was previously focused on counterterrorism, and we used 
our most sophisticated tools to predominantly combat ISIS, al-Qaeda, 
and their affiliates, which were recognized then as posing the greatest 
threats to our global community. Now, they lead our efforts against all 
people and organizations that proclaim or are engaged in violence. We 
are taking the initial progress we made in combatting content 
affiliated with ISIS, al-Qaeda, and their affiliates, and we are 
further building out techniques to identify and combat the full breadth 
of violence and extremism covered under our Dangerous Organizations 
policy.
    Partnerships: We are proud of the work we have done to make 
Facebook a hostile place for those committed to acts of violence. We 
understand, however, that simply working to keep violence off Facebook 
is not an adequate solution to the problem of online extremism and 
violence, particularly because bad actors can leverage a variety of 
platforms. We believe our partnerships with other companies, civil 
society, researchers, and governments are crucial to combatting this 
threat. For example, our P2P Global Digital Challenge, which engages 
university students around the world in competitions to create social 
media campaigns and offline strategies to challenge hateful and 
extremist narratives, has launched over 600 counterspeech campaigns 
from students in 75 countries, engaged over 6,500 students, and reached 
over 200 million people. We're also partnering with Life After Hate, an 
organization founded by former violent extremists, to connect people 
who search for terms associated with white supremacy to resources 
focused on helping people leave behind hate groups.
    Our work to combat violence is never complete. Individuals and 
organizations intent on violent acts come in many ideological stripes--
and the most dangerous among them are deeply resilient. We know that 
bad actors will continue to attempt to skirt our detection with more 
sophisticated efforts, and we are dedicated to continuing to advance 
our work and share our progress.
IV. Conclusion
    Facebook is committed to helping people build a vibrant community 
that encourages and fosters free expression. At the same time, we want 
to do what we can to protect our users from real-world harm and stop 
terrorists, extremists, hate groups, and any others from using our 
platform to promote or engage in violence. We recognize that there is 
always more work to do in combatting the abuse of our site by bad 
actors, but we are proud of the progress we have made over the last few 
years. We know that people have questions about what we are doing to 
continue that progress, and we look forward to working with this 
Committee, regulators, and others in the tech industry and civil 
society to continue working on these issues. I appreciate the 
opportunity to be here today, and I look forward to your questions.

    The Chairman. Thank you very much. Mr. Pickles.

 STATEMENT OF NICK PICKLES, DIRECTOR, PUBLIC POLICY STRATEGY, 
                         TWITTER, INC.

    Mr. Pickles. Chairman Wicker, Ranking Member Cantwell, 
members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to 
appear today to discuss these important issues. Twitter has 
publicly committed to improving the collective health, 
openness, and civility of public conversation on our platform. 
Our policies are designed to keep people safe on Twitter and 
they continuously evolve to reflect the realities of the world 
we operate in. We are working faster, we are investing to 
remove content that distracts from healthy conversation before 
it is reported, including terrorists and violent extremist 
content.
    Tackling terrorism, violent extremism, and preventing 
violent attacks requires a whole of society response including 
from social media companies. Let me be clear, Twitter is 
incentivized to keep terrorists and violent content off our 
service both from a business standpoint and then the current 
legal frameworks. Such content does not serve our business 
interests, it breaks our rules, but is fundamentally contrary 
to our values. Communities in America and around the world have 
been impacted by instance of mass violence, terrorism, and 
violent extremism with tragic frequency in recent years. These 
events demand a robust public policy response from every 
quarter.
    We acknowledge that technology companies have a role to 
play. However, it is important to recognize content removal 
alone cannot solve these issues. I would like to outline four 
of Twitter's key policies in this area. Firstly, Twitter takes 
a zero tolerance approach to terrorists content on our service. 
Individuals may not promote terrorism, engage in terrorist 
recruitment, or terrorist acts. Since 2015, we have suspended 
more than 1.5 million accounts for violations of our rules 
related to terrorism and continue to see more than 90 percent 
of these accounts suspended through our own proactive measures.
    In the majority of cases, we take action at the account 
creation stage before account has even tweeted, and the 
remaining 10 percent is identified through a combination of 
user reports and partnerships. Second, we prohibit the use of 
Twitter by violent extremist groups. These are defined in our 
rules as groups that whether by statements on or off the 
platform use or promote violence against civilians to further 
their cause whatever their ideology. Since the introduction of 
this policy in 2017, we have taken action on more than 186 
groups globally and suspended more than 2,000 unique accounts. 
Third, Twitter does not allow hateful conduct on our service.
    An individual on Twitter is not permitted to threaten or 
promote violence or directly attack people based on their 
protected characteristics. Where any of these rules are broken, 
we will take action to remove the content and will permanently 
remove those promoting terrorism or violent extremism from 
Twitter. Fortunately, our rules prohibit the selling, buying, 
or facilitating transactions in weapons, including firearms, 
ammunition, and explosives, and instructions on making weapons. 
So are explosive devices or 3D printed weapons.
    We will take appropriate action on any account found to be 
engaged in this activity, including a permanent suspension 
where appropriate. Additionally, we prohibit the promotion of 
weapons and weapon accessories globally through our paid 
advertising policies. Collaboration with our industry peers and 
civil society is critically important to addressing the common 
threats from terrorism globally.
    In June 2017, we launched the Global Internet Forum to 
Counter Terrorism, GCT, a partnership with Twitter, YouTube, 
Facebook, and Microsoft. This facilitates, among other things, 
information-sharing, technical cooperation, research 
collaboration, including with academic institutions. Twitter 
and technology companies have a role to play in addressing mass 
violence, ensuring our platforms cannot be exploited by those 
promoting violence. This cannot be the only public policy 
response and removing content alone will not stop those who are 
determined to cause harm.
    Quite often, when we remove content from our platforms, it 
moves those views, these ideologies into the darker corners of 
the Internet where they cannot be challenged and held to 
account. As our pair companies are improving their efforts, 
this content continues to migrate to less governed platforms 
and services.
    We are committed to learning and improving, but every part 
of the online ecosystem has a part to play. Addressing mass 
violence requires a whole of society response. We welcome the 
opportunity to continue to work with industry peers, Government 
institutions, legislators, law enforcement, academics, and 
civil society to find the right solutions. Thank you for your 
time today.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Pickles follows:]

 Prepared Statment of Nick Pickles, Director, Public Policy Strategy, 
                             Twitter, Inc.
    Chairman Wicker, Ranking Member Cantwell, and Members of the 
Committee:

    At Twitter, our mission is to serve the public conversation. 
Twitter is a place where people from around the world come together in 
an open and free exchange of ideas. We have made the health of our 
service the top priority. Conversely, abuse, malicious automation, 
hateful conduct, violent extremist and terrorist content terrorism, and 
manipulation will detract from the health of our platform.
    Tackling terrorism, violent extremism, and preventing violent 
attacks require a whole of society response, including from social 
media. It has long been a priority of Twitter to remove this content 
from the service. Let me be clear: Twitter has no incentive to keep 
terrorist and violent extremist content available on our platform. Such 
content does not serve our business interests, breaks our rules, and is 
fundamentally contrary to our values.
    Communities in America and around the world have been impacted by 
incidents of mass violence, terrorism, and violent extremism with 
tragic frequency in recent years. These events demand a robust public 
policy response from every quarter. We acknowledge that the technology 
companies play a critical role, however, it is important to recognize 
content removal online cannot alone solve these issues.
    We welcome the opportunity to continue to work with you on the 
Committee, our industry peers, government, academics, and civil society 
to find the right solutions. Partnership is essential.
    My statement today will provide information and deeper context on: 
(I) Twitter's work to protect the health of the public conversation, 
including combating terrorism, violent extremist groups, and hateful 
conduct; (II) our policies relating to weapons and weapon accessories; 
and (III) our partnerships and societal engagement.
I. TWITTER'S POLICIES ON TERRORIST CONTENT, VIOLENT 
        EXTREMIST GROUPS, AND HATEFUL CONDUCT
    All individuals accessing or using Twitter's services must adhere 
to the policies set forth in the Twitter Rules. Accounts under 
investigation or that have been detected as sharing content in 
violation with the Twitter Rules may be required to remove content, or 
in serious cases, will see their account permanently suspended. Our 
policies and enforcement options evolve continuously to address 
emerging behaviors online.
A. Policy on Terrorism
    Individuals on Twitter are prohibited from making specific threats 
of violence or wish for the serious physical harm, death, or disease of 
an individual or group of people. This includes, but is not limited to, 
threatening or promoting terrorism.
    We suspended more than 1.5 million accounts for violations related 
to the promotion of terrorism between August 1, 2015, and December 31, 
2018. In 2018, a total of 371,669 accounts were suspended for 
violations related to promotion of terrorism. More than 90 percent of 
these accounts are suspended through our proactive measures.
    We have a zero-tolerance policy and take swift action on ban 
evaders and other forms of behavior used by terrorist entities and 
their affiliates. In the majority of cases, we take action at the 
account creation stage--before the account even Tweets.
    Government and law enforcement reports constituted less than 0.1 
percent of all suspensions in the last reporting period. Continuing the 
trend we have seen for some time, the number of reports we received 
from governments of terrorist content from the second half of last year 
decreased by 77 percent compared to the previous reporting period 
covering January through June 2018.
    We are reassured by the progress we have made, including 
recognition by independent experts. For example, Dublin City University 
Professor Maura Conway found in a detailed study that ``ISIS's 
previously strong and vibrant Twitter community is now . . . virtually 
non-existent.''
B. Policy on Violent Extremist Groups
    In December 2017, we broadened our rules to encompass accounts 
affiliated with violent extremist groups. Our prohibition on the use of 
Twitter's services by violent extremist groups--i.e., identified groups 
subscribing to the use of violence as a means to advance their cause--
applies irrespective of the cause of the group.
    Our policy states:

    Violent extremist groups are those that meet all of the below 
criteria:

   identify through their stated purpose, publications, or 
        actions as an extremist group;

   have engaged in, or currently engage in, violence and/or the 
        promotion of violence as a means to further their cause; and

   target civilians in their acts and/or promotion of violence.

    An individual on Twitter may not affiliate with such an 
organization--whether by their own statements or activity both on and 
off the service--and we will permanently suspend those who do so.
    We know that the challenges we face are not static, nor are bad 
actors homogenous from one country to the next in how they behave. Our 
approach combines flexibility with a clear, consistent policy 
philosophy, enabling us to move quickly while establishing clear norms 
of unacceptable behavior.
    Since the introduction of our policy on violent extremist groups, 
we have taken action on 186 groups under this policy and permanently 
suspended 2,217 unique accounts. Ninety-three of these groups advocate 
violence against civilians alongside some form of extremist white 
supremacist ideology.
C. Policy on Hateful Conduct
    People on Twitter are not permitted to promote violence against or 
directly attack or threaten other people on the basis of race, 
ethnicity, national origin, sexual orientation, gender, gender 
identity, religious affiliation, age, disability, or serious disease. 
We also do not allow accounts whose primary purpose is inciting harm 
toward others on the basis of these categories.
    We do not allow individuals to use hateful images or symbols in 
their profile image or profile header. Individuals on the platform are 
not allowed to use the username, display name, or profile bio to engage 
in abusive behavior, such as targeted harassment or expressing hate 
toward a person, group, or protected category.
    Under this policy, we take action against behavior that targets 
individuals or an entire protected category with hateful conduct. 
Targeting can happen in a number of ways, for example, mentions, 
including a photo of an individual, or referring to someone by their 
full name.
    When determining the penalty for violating this policy, we consider 
a number of factors including, but not limited to the severity of the 
violation and an individual's previous record of rule violations. For 
example, we may ask someone to remove the violating content and serve a 
period of time in read-only mode before they can Tweet again. 
Subsequent violations will lead to longer read-only periods and may 
eventually result in permanent account suspension. If an account is 
engaging primarily in abusive behavior, or is deemed to have shared a 
violent threat, we will permanently suspend the account upon initial 
review.
D. Investing in Tech: Behavior vs. Content
    Twitter's philosophy is to take a behavior-led approach, utilizing 
a combination of machine learning and human review to prioritize 
reports and improve the health of the public conversation. That is to 
say, we increasingly look at how accounts behave before we look at the 
content they are posting. This is how we seek to scale our efforts 
globally and leverage technology even where the language used is highly 
context specific. Twitter employs extensive content detection 
technology to identify potentially abusive content on the service, 
along with allowing users to report content to us either as an 
individual or a bystander.
    For abuse, this strategy has allowed us to take three times the 
amount of enforcement of action on abuse within 24 hours than this time 
last year. We now proactively surface over 50 percent of abusive 
content we remove using our technology compared to 20 percent a year 
ago. This reduces the burden on individuals to report content to us. 
Since we started using machine learning three years ago to reduce the 
visibility on abusive content:

   80 percent of all replies that are removed were already less 
        visible;

   Abuse reports have been reduced by 7.6 percent;

   The most visible replies receive 45 percent less abuse 
        reports;

   100,000 accounts were suspended for creating new accounts 
        after a suspension during January through March 2019 -- a 45 
        percent increase from the same time last year;

   60 percent faster response to appeals requests with our new 
        in-app appeal process;

   3 times more abusive accounts suspended within 24 hours 
        after a report compared to the same time last year; and

   2.5 times more private information removed with a new, 
        easier reporting process.
II. TWITTER POLICIES REGARDING WEAPONS AND WEAPON 
        ACCESSORIES
    Although Twitter's service does not have an e-commerce function, 
our Rules prohibit the selling, buying, or facilitating transactions in 
weapons, including firearms, ammunition, and explosives, and 
instructions on making weapons, such as bombs or 3D printed weapons. We 
will take appropriate action on any account found to be engaged in this 
activity, including permanent suspension of accounts where appropriate.
    As stated publicly in our advertising policies, Twitter does not 
allow the use of our promoted products for the purpose of promoting 
weapons and weapon accessories globally. We explicitly ban advertising 
of guns, including airsoft guns, air guns, blow guns, paintball guns, 
antique guns, replica guns, and imitation guns. Twitter also prohibits 
the use of our promoted products for gun parts and accessories, 
including gun mounts, grips, magazines, and ammunition. We also do not 
allow the advertising of the rental of guns (other than from shooting 
ranges), stun guns, taser guns, mace, pepper spray or other similar 
self defense weapons. Additionally, we do not permit the advertising of 
a variety of weapons including swords, machetes, and other edged/bladed 
weapons; explosives, bombs and bomb making supplies and/or equipment; 
fireworks, flamethrowers and other pyrotechnic devices; and knives, 
including butterfly knives, fighting knives, switchblades, disguised 
knives, and throwing stars.
    We do allow advertising related to the discussion of public policy 
issues pertaining to firearms. Twitter requires extensive information 
disclosures of any account involved in political issue advertising and 
provides specific information to the public via our Ads Transparency 
Center. Such advertisements are distinctly labeled as political issue 
promoted tweets. Organizations on both sides of the debate have 
utilized Twitter's promoted products and continue to do so, within the 
boundaries of our advertising policies.
III. PARTNERSHIPS AND SOCIETAL ENGAGEMENT
    We work closely with the Federal Bureau of Investigation, along 
with law enforcement and numerous public safety authorities around the 
world. As our partnerships deepen, we are able to better respond to the 
changing threats we all face, sharing valuable information and promptly 
responding to valid legal requests for information.
A. Cooperation with Law Enforcement
    We have well-established relationships with law enforcement 
agencies, and we look forward to continued cooperation with them on 
these issues, as often they have access to information critical to our 
joint efforts to stop bad faith actors. The threat we face requires 
extensive partnership and collaboration with our government partners 
and industry peers. We each possess information the other does not 
have, and our combined information is more powerful in combating these 
threats together. We have continuous coverage to address reports from 
law enforcement around the world and have a portal to swiftly handle 
law enforcement requests rendered by appropriate legal process.
    Twitter informs individuals using the platform that we may 
preserve, use, or disclose an individual's personal data if we believe 
that it is reasonably necessary to comply with a law, regulation, legal 
process, or governmental request; to protect the safety of any person; 
to protect the safety or integrity of our platform, including to help 
prevent spam, abuse, or malicious actors on our services, or to explain 
why we have removed content or accounts from our services; to address 
fraud, security, or technical issues; or to protect our rights or 
property or the rights or property of those who use our services.
    Twitter retains different types of information for different time 
periods, and in accordance with our Terms of Service and Privacy 
Policy. Given Twitter's real-time nature, some information (e.g., 
Internet Protocol logs) may only be stored for a very brief period of 
time.
    Some information we store is automatically collected, while other 
information is provided at the user's discretion. Though we do store 
this information, we cannot guarantee its accuracy. For example, the 
user may have created a fake or anonymous profile. Twitter doesn't 
require real name use, e-mail verification, or identity authentication.
    Once an account has been deactivated, there is a very brief period 
in which we may be able to access account information, including 
Tweets. Content removed by account holders (e.g., Tweets) is generally 
not available.
    Twitter accepts requests from law enforcement to preserve records, 
which constitute potentially relevant evidence in legal proceedings. We 
will preserve, but not disclose, a temporary snapshot of the relevant 
account records for 90 days pending service of valid legal process.
    Twitter may honor requests for extensions of preservation requests, 
but encourage law enforcement agencies to seek records through the 
appropriate channels in a timely manner, as we cannot always guarantee 
that requested information will be available.
    Our biannual Twitter Transparency Report highlights trends in 
enforcement of our Rules, legal requests, intellectual property-related 
requests, and e-mail privacy best practices. The report also provides 
insight into whether or not we take action on these requests. The 
Transparency Report includes information requests from governments 
worldwide and non-government legal requests we have received for 
account information. In 2018, we received 4,323 requests from United 
States authorities, relating to 13,086 accounts,
B. Industry Collaboration
    Collaboration with our industry peers and civil society is also 
critically important to addressing common threats from terrorism 
globally. In June 2017, we launched the Global Internet Forum to 
Counter Terrorism (the ``GIFCT''), a partnership among Twitter, 
YouTube, Facebook, and Microsoft.
    The GIFCT facilitates, among other things, information sharing; 
technical cooperation; and research collaboration, including with 
academic institutions. In September 2017, the members of the GIFCT 
announced a significant financial commitment to support research on 
terrorist abuse of the Internet and how governments, tech companies, 
and civil society can respond effectively. Our goal is to establish a 
network of experts that can develop platform-agnostic research 
questions and analysis that consider a range of geopolitical contexts.
    Technological collaboration is a key part of GIFCT's work. In the 
first two years of GIFCT, two projects have provided technical 
resources to support the work of members and smaller companies to 
remove terrorist content.
    First, the shared industry database of ``hashes''--unique digital 
``fingerprints''--for violent terrorist propaganda now spans more than 
100,000 hashes. The database allows a company that discovers terrorist 
content on one of its sites to create a digital fingerprint and share 
it with the other companies in the forum, who can then use those hashes 
to identify such content on their services or platforms, review against 
their respective policies and individual rules, and remove matching 
content as appropriate or block extremist content before it is posted.
    Second, a year ago, Twitter began working with a small group of 
companies to test a new collaborative system. Because Twitter does not 
allow files other than photos or short videos to be uploaded, one of 
the behaviors we saw from those seeking to promote terrorism was to 
post links to other services where people could access files, longer 
videos, PDFs, and other materials. Our pilot system allows us to alert 
other companies when we removed an account or Tweet that linked to 
material that promoted terrorism hosted on their service. This 
information sharing ensures the hosting companies can monitor and track 
similar behavior, taking enforcement action pursuant with their 
individual policies. This is not a high-tech approach, but it is simple 
and effective, recognizing the resource constraints of smaller 
companies.
    Based on positive feedback, the partnership has now expanded to 12 
companies and we have shared more than 14,000 unique URLs with these 
services. Every time a piece of content is removed at source, it means 
any link to that source--wherever it is posted--will no longer be 
operational.
    We are eager to partner with additional companies to expand this 
project, and we look forward to building on our existing partnerships 
in the future.
    Finally, GIFCT has established a real-time crisis response process 
that allows us to respond to a violent act quickly to ensure that we 
share valuable information to limit the spread of terrorist and violent 
extremist content.
C. The Christchurch Call to Action
    In the months since a terrorist attack in Christchurch, New 
Zealand, New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern has led the 
international policy debate, and that work has culminated in the 
Christchurch Call. Twitter's Chief Executive Officer Jack Dorsey 
attended the launch of the Christchurch Call in Paris, meeting with the 
Prime Minister to express our support and partnership with the New 
Zealand Government.
    Because terrorism cannot be solved by the tech industry alone, the 
Christchurch Call is a landmark moment and an opportunity to convene 
governments, industry, and civil society to unite behind our mutual 
commitment to a safe, secure open, global Internet. It is also a moment 
to recognize that however or wherever evil manifests itself, it affects 
us all.
    In fulfilling our commitments in the Call, we will take a wide 
range of actions. We continue to invest in technology to prioritize 
signals, including user reports, to ensure we can respond as quickly as 
possible to a potential incident, building on the work we have done to 
harness proprietary technology to detect and disrupt bad actors 
proactively.
    As part of our commitment to educate users about our rules and to 
further prohibit the promotion of terrorism or violent extremist 
groups, we have updated our rules and associated materials to be 
clearer on where these policies apply. This is accompanied by further 
data being provided in our transparency report, allowing public 
consideration of the actions we are taking under our rules, as well as 
how much content is detected by our proactive efforts.
    Twitter will take concrete steps to reduce the risk of 
livestreaming being abused by terrorists, while recognizing that during 
a crisis these tools are also used by news organizations, citizens and 
governments. We are investing in technology and tools to ensure we can 
act even faster to remove video content and stop it spreading.
    Finally we are committed to continuing our partnership with 
industry peers, expanding on our URL sharing efforts along with wider 
mentoring efforts, strengthening our new crisis protocol arrangements, 
and supporting the expansion of GIFCT membership.
D. Partnerships with Civil Society
    In tandem with removing content, our wider efforts on countering 
violent extremism going back to 2015 have focused on bolstering the 
voices of non-governmental organizations and credible outside groups. 
These organizations and groups can use our uniquely open service to 
spread positive and affirmative campaigns that seek to offer an 
alternative to narratives of hate. Ideologies can only be successfully 
countered by those who have the credibility to take on the core 
messages being propagated, and if these core messages go unchallenged 
the removal of content will always be an incomplete response. These 
groups do critical work and policy makers should continue to find ways 
to broaden support for these efforts.
    We have partnered with organizations delivering counter and 
alternative narrative initiatives across the globe and we encourage the 
Committee to consider the role of government in supporting the work of 
credible messengers in this space at home and abroad. Twitter has also 
delivered capacity building workshops to a range of organizations who 
seek to provide positive, alternative messages and work with 
communities and individuals at risk.
E. A Whole of Society Response
    The challenges we face as a society are complex, varied, and 
constantly evolving. These challenges are reflected and often magnified 
by technology. The push and pull factors influencing individuals vary 
widely, there is no common catalyst to action and there is no one 
solution to prevent an individual turning to violence. This is a long-
term problem requiring a long-term response, not just the removal of 
content.
    We are committed to playing our part. We will continue to seek to 
proactively remove terrorist and violent extremist content, work with 
industry peers to respond quickly in a crisis and to support smaller 
companies in tackling these challenges.
    While we strictly enforce our policies, removing all discussion of 
particular viewpoints, no matter how uncomfortable society may find 
them, does not eliminate the ideology underpinning them. There is a 
risk such an approach moves these views into darker corners of the 
Internet where they cannot be challenged and held to account. As our 
peer companies improve in their efforts, this content continues to 
migrate to less-governed platforms and services often not at the 
forefront of public discussions. We are committed to learning and 
improving, but every part of the online ecosystem has a part to play.
    Furthermore, not every issue will be one where the underlying 
factors can be addressed by public policy interventions led by 
technology companies.
                                 * * *
    We stand ready to assist the Committee in its important work 
regarding the issue of the tools that Internet companies can employ to 
stop the spread of mass violence on our services.

    The Chairman. Thank you very much. Mr. Slater.

STATEMENT OF DEREK SLATER, GLOBAL DIRECTOR, INFORMATION POLICY, 
                           GOOGLE LLC

    Mr. Slater. Chairman Wicker, Ranking Member Cantwell, 
distinguished members of the Committee, thank you for the 
opportunity to appear before you today. My name is Derek 
Slater. I am the Global Director of Information Policy at 
Google. In that capacity, I lead a team that advises the 
company on public policy frameworks for dealing with online 
content, including hate speech, extremism, and terrorism. 
Before I begin, I would like to take a moment on behalf of 
everyone at Google to express our horror in learning of the 
tragic attacks in Texas, Ohio and elsewhere, and share our 
sincere condolences to the affected families, friends, and 
communities.
    All Google services were not involved in these recent 
incidents. We have engaged with the White House, Congress, and 
governments around the globe on steps we are taking to ensure 
that our platforms are not used to support hate speech or 
incite violence. In my testimony today, I will focus on three 
key areas where we are making progress to help protect people. 
First, how we work with governments and law enforcement, 
second, how our efforts to prohibit the promotion of products 
that causes damage, harm, or injury, and third, the enforcement 
of our policies around terrorism and hate speech.
    First, Google engages in ongoing dialogue with law 
enforcement agencies to understand the threat landscape and 
respond to threats that affect the safety of our users and the 
broader public. For example, when we have a good faith belief 
that there is a threat to life or serious bodily harm made on 
our platform in the United States, the Google cybercrime 
investigation group will report it to the Northern California 
Regional Intelligence Center. In turn, that Intelligence Center 
quickly gets the report into the hands of officers to respond.
    The cybercrime investigation group is on call 24/7 to make 
these reports. We are also deeply committed to working with 
Government, the tech industry, and experts from civil society 
and academia. Since 2017, we have done this in particular 
through the Global Internet Forum to Counter Terrorism of which 
YouTube is a founded company, and Google was its first chair. 
Recently, GIFCT introduced joint content incident protocols for 
responding to emerging or active events. The GIFCT also 
released its first-ever Transparency Report and a new counter 
speech campaign toolkit.
    Second, we take the threat posed by gun violence in the 
United States very seriously and our advertising policies have 
long prohibited the promotion of weapons, ammunition, and 
similar products that cause damage, harm, or injury. Similarly, 
we also prohibit the promotion of instructions for making guns, 
explosives, or other harmful products, and we employ a number 
of proactive and reactive measures to ensure that our policies 
are appropriately enforced. We know that we must be vigilant on 
these issues and are constantly improving our enforcement 
procedures, including implementing enhancements to our 
automated systems and updating our incident management and 
manual review procedures.
    Third, on YouTube, we have rigorous policies and programs 
that defend against the use of our platform to spread hate or 
incite violence. Over the past two years, we have invested 
heavily in machines and people to quickly identify and remove 
content that violates our policies. This includes machine 
learning technology to effectively enforce our policies at 
scale, hiring over 10,000 people across Google tasked with 
detecting or viewing and removing content.
    An intel desk of experts that proactively looks for new 
trends and improves escalation pathway for expert NGOs and 
governments to notify us about content in bulk through our 
trusted flagger program, and finally going beyond removals by 
actively creating programs to promote beneficial counter 
speech, such as the creators for change program and alphabets 
jigsaw groups use for a redirect method. This broad, cross 
sectional work has led to tangible results. Over 87 percent of 
the 9 million videos we removed in the second quarter of 2019 
were first flagged by our automated systems.
    More than 80 percent of those auto flagged videos were 
removed before they received a single view, and overall, videos 
that violate our policies generate a fraction of a percent of 
the views on YouTube. Our efforts do not end there. As we are 
constantly evolving to new challenges and looking for ways to 
improve our policies. For example, YouTube recently further 
updated its hate speech policy. The updated policy specifically 
prohibits videos alleging that a group is superior in order to 
justify discrimination, segregation, or exclusion based on 
qualities like age, gender, race, caste, religion, sexual 
orientation, or veteran status.
    It can take months for us to ramp up enforcement of our new 
policies. We have already seen five times spike and removals 
and channel terminations on hate speech. In conclusion, we take 
the safety of our users very seriously and value our close and 
collaborative relationships with law enforcement and government 
agencies.
    We understand these are difficult issues of great interest 
to Congress and want to be responsible actors who are part of 
the solution. As these issues evolve, Google will continue to 
invest in the people and technology to meet the challenge. We 
look forward to continued collaboration with the Committee as 
it examines these issues. Thank you for your time, and I look 
forward to taking your questions.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Slater follows:]

   Prepared Statement of Derek Slater, Director, Information Policy, 
                               Google LLC
    Chairman Wicker, Ranking Member Cantwell, and distinguished members 
of the Committee: Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you 
today. I appreciate Congress' work in looking closely at how to prevent 
tragic episodes of mass violence.
    My name is Derek Slater, and I am the Global Director of 
Information Policy at Google. In that capacity I lead a team that 
advises the company on public policy frameworks for dealing with online 
content--including hate speech, extremism, and terrorism. Prior to my 
role at Google, I worked on Internet policy at the Electronic Frontier 
Foundation and at the Berkman Center for Internet and Society.
    Before I begin, I would like to take a moment on behalf of everyone 
at Google to express our horror in learning of the tragic attacks in 
Texas and Ohio and to share our sincere condolences to the affected 
families, friends, and communities. While Google services were not 
involved in these recent incidents, we have engaged with the White 
House, Congress, and governments around the globe on steps we are 
taking to ensure that our platforms are not used to support hate speech 
or incite violence.
    We believe the free flow of information and ideas has important 
social, cultural and economic benefits, though society has always 
recognized that free speech must be subject to reasonable limits. This 
is true both online and off, and it is why, in addition to respecting 
the law, we have additional policies, procedures, and community 
guidelines that govern what activity is permissible on our platforms.
    In my testimony today, I will focus on three key areas where we are 
making progress to help protect people: (i) how we work with 
governments and law enforcement; (ii) our efforts to prohibit the 
promotion of products that cause damage, harm, or injury; and (iii) the 
enforcement of our policies around terrorism and hate speech.
Working with Government and Law Enforcement
    Google appreciates that law enforcement agencies face significant 
challenges in protecting the public against crime and terrorism. Google 
engages in ongoing dialogue with law enforcement agencies to understand 
the threat landscape and respond to threats that affect the safety of 
our users and the broader public. When we become aware of statements on 
our platform that constitute a threat to life or that reflect that 
someone's life may be in danger, we report this activity to law 
enforcement agencies.
    For example, when we have a good faith belief that there is a 
threat to life or serious bodily harm made on our platform in the 
United States, the Google CyberCrime Investigation Group (CCIG) will 
report it to the Northern California Regional Intelligence Center 
(NCRIC). In turn, NCRIC quickly gets the report into the hands of 
officers to respond. CCIG is on call 24/7 to make these reports.
    Under U.S. law, the Stored Communications Act allows Google and 
other service providers to voluntarily disclose user data to 
governmental entities in emergency circumstances where the provider has 
a good faith belief that disclosing the information will prevent loss 
of life or serious physical injury to a person. Our team is staffed on 
a 24/7/365 basis to respond to these emergency disclosure requests 
(EDRs). We have seen significant growth in the volume of EDRs that we 
receive from U.S. governmental entities, as illustrated in our 
transparency report covering government requests for user data. In 
fact, the number of EDRs submitted from agencies in the U.S. almost 
doubled from 2017 to 2018. We have grown our teams to accommodate this 
growing volume and to ensure we can quickly respond to emergency 
situations that implicate public safety.
    We are also deeply committed to working with government, the tech 
industry, and experts from civil society and academia to protect our 
services from being exploited by bad actors. The recent tragic events 
in Christchurch presented unique challenges, and we had to take 
unprecedented steps to address the sheer volume of new videos related 
to the events. In the months since, Google and YouTube signed the 
Christchurch Call to Action, a series of commitments to quickly and 
responsibly address terrorist content online. This is an extension of 
our ongoing commitment to working with our colleagues in the industry 
to address the challenges of terrorism online. Since 2017, we've done 
this through the Global Internet Forum to Counter Terrorism (GIFCT), of 
which Google is a founding company and was its first chair. Recently, 
GIFCT introduced joint content incident protocols for responding to 
emerging or active events. The GIFCT also released its first-ever 
Transparency Report and a new counterspeech campaign toolkit that will 
help activists and civil society organizations challenge the voices of 
extremism online.
Prohibiting the Promotion of Products That May Cause Damage, Harm, or 
        Injury
    We take the threat posed by gun violence in the United States very 
seriously and our advertising policies have long prohibited the 
promotion of weapons, ammunition, explosive materials, fireworks, and 
similar products that cause damage, harm, or injury. Similarly, we also 
prohibit the promotion of instructions for making guns, explosives, or 
other harmful products.
    On platforms like Google Ads and Google Shopping Ads, we employ a 
number of proactive and reactive measures to ensure that our policies 
are appropriately enforced. For example, we run automated and manual 
checks to detect content that violates our policies. If an advertiser 
or merchant violates our policies, we will take appropriate action up 
to and including suspension of their account. Users can also provide 
direct feedback on ads that potentially violate Google policies via an 
external form using the `Report a violation' link or via the feedback 
link on Google.com and other Google properties to report any products 
that may violate our policies. This feedback is reviewed by our teams 
and appropriate action is taken.
    We know that we must be vigilant on these issues and are constantly 
improving our enforcement procedures, including implementing 
enhancements to our automated systems and updating our incident 
management and manual review procedures.
Policies and Enforcement on YouTube for Terrorism and Hate Speech
    We have robust policies and programs to defend our platforms to 
spread hate or incite violence. This includes prohibitions on: 
terrorist recruitment, violent extremism, incitement to violence, 
glorification of violence, and instructional videos related to acts of 
violence. We apply these policies to violent extremism of all kinds, 
whether inciting violence on the basis of race or religion or as part 
of an organized terrorist group.
    In order to improve the effectiveness of our policy enforcement, we 
have invested heavily in both technology and people to quickly identify 
and remove content that violates our policies against incitement to 
violence and hate speech:

  (1)  YouTube's enforcement system starts from the point at which a 
        user uploads a video. If our technology detects that the video 
        is similar to videos that we know already violate our policies, 
        it is sent for humans to review. If they determine that it 
        violates our policies, they remove it and the system makes a 
        ``digital fingerprint'' or hash of the video so it can't be 
        uploaded again.

  (2)  Machine learning technology also helps us more effectively 
        identify this content and enforce our policies at scale. 
        However, because hate and violent extremism content is 
        constantly evolving and can sometimes be context-dependent, we 
        also rely on experts to help us identify policy-violating 
        videos. Some of these experts sit at our intel desk, which 
        proactively looks for new trends in content that might violate 
        our policies. We also developed an improved escalation pathway 
        for expert NGOs and governments to notify us of bad content in 
        bulk through our Trusted Flagger program. We reserve the final 
        decision on whether to remove videos they flag, but we benefit 
        immensely from their expertise.

  (3)  This broad cross-sectional work has led to tangible results. 
        Over 87 percent of the 9 million videos we removed in the 
        second quarter of 2019 were first flagged by our automated 
        systems. More than 80 percent of those auto-flagged videos were 
        removed before they received a single view. And overall, videos 
        that violate our policies generate a fraction of a percent of 
        the views on YouTube.

    Our efforts do not end there, as we are constantly evolving to new 
challenges and looking for ways to improve our policies. For example, 
YouTube recently updated its Hate Speech policy to specifically 
prohibit videos alleging that a group is superior in order to justify 
discrimination, segregation or exclusion based on qualities like age, 
gender, race, caste, religion, sexual orientation or veteran status. 
This would include, for example, videos that promote or glorify Nazi 
ideology, because it is inherently discriminatory. YouTube also updated 
its policies to prohibit content denying that well-documented violent 
events, like the Holocaust or the shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary, 
took place.
    The updated Hate Speech policy was launched in early June, and as 
our teams review and remove more content in line with the new policy, 
our machine learning algorithms will improve in tandem to help us 
identify and remove such content. Though it can take months for us to 
ramp up enforcement of a new policy, the profound impact of our Hate 
Speech policy update is already evident in the data released in this 
quarter's Community Guidelines Enforcement Report: the number of 
individual video removals for hate speech saw a 5x spike to over 
100,000, the number of channel terminations for hate speech also saw a 
5x spike to 17,000, and the total comment removals nearly doubled in Q2 
to over 500 million due in part to a large increase in hate speech 
removals.
    Finally, we go beyond removing policy-violating content by actively 
creating programs to promote beneficial counterspeech. These programs 
present narratives and elevate credible voices speaking out against 
hate, violence, and terrorism. For example, our Creators for Change 
program supports creators who are tackling tough issues, including 
extremism and hate by building empathy and acting as positive role 
models. We launched our most recent Creators for Change global campaign 
videos in November 2018. As of June 2019 they already had 59 million 
views; the creators involved have over 60 million subscribers and more 
than 8.5 billion lifetime views of their channels; and through `Local 
Chapters' of Creators for Change, creators tackle challenges specific 
to different markets.
    Alphabet's Jigsaw group, an incubator to tackle some of the 
toughest global security challenges, has deployed the Redirect Method, 
which uses targeting tools and curated YouTube playlists to disrupt 
online radicalization. The method is open to anyone to use, and NGOs 
have sponsored campaigns against a wide-spectrum of ideologically-
motivated terrorists and violent extremists.
Conclusion
    We take the safety of our users very seriously and value our close 
and collaborative relationships with law enforcement and government 
agencies. We have invested substantial resources to tackle the problem 
of hate speech. At present, we spend hundreds of millions of dollars 
annually and have more than 10,000 people working across Google to 
address content that might violate our policies, which include our 
policies against promoting violence and terrorism.
    We understand these are difficult issues of great interest to 
Congress and want to be responsible actors who are a part of the 
solution. As these issues evolve, Google will continue to invest in the 
people and technology to meet the challenge. We look forward to 
continued collaboration with the Committee as it examines these issues. 
Thank you for your time. I look forward to taking your questions.

    The Chairman. Thank you very much. Mr. Selim, your group 
prefers to be known as ADL these days, is that correct?
    Mr. Selim. Correct. The Anti-Defamation League goes by ADL 
for short.
    Mr. Chairman. Great. Well, we appreciate you being with us 
today and we are happy to receive your testimony.

       STATEMENT OF GEORGE SELIM, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT, 
        NATIONAL PROGRAMS, ADL (ANTI-DEFAMATION LEAGUE)

    Mr. Selim. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member 
Cantwell, thank you for the opportunity to be here with the 
distinguished members of this Committee this morning. My name 
is George Selim and I serve as the Senior Vice President for 
Programs at the ADL or the Anti-Defamation League, and for 
decades the ADL has fought against bigotry and anti-Semitism by 
exposing extremist groups and individuals who spread hate to 
incite violence.
    Today, the ADL is the foremost non-governmental authority 
on domestic terrorism, extremism, hate groups, and hate crimes. 
I have personally served in several roles and the Government's 
National Security apparatus at the Department of Justice, the 
Department of Homeland Security, at the White House on the 
National Security Council, and now outside Government on the 
frontlines of combating anti-Semitism and all forms of bigotry 
at the ADL. In my testimony, I would like to share with you 
some key data, findings, analysis, and urge this Committee to 
take action to counter a severe national security threat, the 
threat of online white supremacist extremism that threatens our 
communities.
    The alleged El Paso shooter posted a manifesto to 8chan 
prior to the attack. He expressed support for the accused 
shooter in Christchurch, New Zealand who also posted on 8chan. 
Before the massacre in Poway, California, the alleged shooter 
posted a link to his manifesto on 8chan, citing the terrorists 
in New Zealand and in the Pittsburgh Tree of Life attack, three 
killing sprees, three white supremacist manifestos--one 
targeted Muslims, another targeted Jews, and a third targeted 
Latino and other immigrant communities. One thing these three 
killers had in common was 8chan, an online platform that has 
become the go-to for many bigots and extremists.
    Unfettered access to online platforms, both fringe and 
mainstream, has significantly driven the scale, speed, and 
effectiveness of these forms of extremist attacks. Our ADL 
research shows that domestic extremist violence is trending up, 
and that anti-Semitic hate is trending up. The FBI and DOJ data 
shows similar trends. The online environment today amplifies 
hateful voices worldwide and facilitates the coordination, 
recruitment, and propaganda that fuels the extremism that 
terrorizes our communities, all of our communities.
    Whether through Government, the private sector, or civil 
society, immediate action is paramount to prevent the next 
tragedy that could take innocent lives. ADL has worked with the 
platforms represented on this table to try to address that hate 
and its rampant nature online. We have been part of the 
conversations to improve the terms of service, content 
moderation programs, and better support for those individuals 
experiencing hate and harassment on those platforms.
    We appreciate this work greatly but much more needs to be 
done. ADL has called on these companies at this hearing as well 
as many others to be far more transparent about the prevalence 
and nature of hate on their platforms. We need meaningful 
transparency to give actionable information to policymakers and 
stakeholders, but the growth of hate and extremist violence 
will not be solved by addressing these issues online alone. We 
urge this Committee to take immediate action.
    First, our Nation's leaders must clearly and forcefully 
call out bigotry in all its forms at every opportunity. Our 
Nation's law enforcement leadership must make enforcing hate 
crimes laws a top priority. Our communities need this 
Congress's immediate action on a range of ways, notably to 
codify Federal offices to address domestic terrorism and 
extremism and create transparent and comprehensive reporting 
such as that required in the Domestic Terrorism Prevention Act 
and similar measures in the Domestic Terrorism Data Act. Our 
Federal legal system currently lacks the means to prosecute a 
white supremacist terrorist as a terrorist. Congress should 
explore whether it is possible to craft a rights protecting 
domestic terrorism statute.
    Any statute that Congress should consider would need to 
include specific, careful Congressional and civil liberties 
oversight to ensure the spirit of such protections is 
faithfully executed. In addition, the State Department should 
examine whether certain foreign, white supremacist groups meet 
the criteria for designation an FTO, foreign terrorist 
organizations. For technology and social media companies, we 
look forward to companies expanding their terms of service and 
exploring accountability and governance challenges, aspiring to 
greater transparency in how you address these issues and 
partnering with civil society groups to help in all of these 
efforts.
    ADL stands ready both with both the Government and the 
private sector to better address all forms and threats online. 
This is an all-hands-on-deck moment to protect all of our 
communities. I look forward to your questions. Mr. Chairman, 
Ranking Member, and other distinguished members of this 
Committee. Thank you.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Selim follows:]

      Prepared Statement of George Selim, Senior Vice President, 
            National Programs, ADL (Anti-Defamation League)
Introduction
    Since 1913, the mission of ADL (Anti-Defamation League) has been to 
``stop the defamation of the Jewish people and to secure justice and 
fair treatment to all.'' For decades, ADL has fought against bigotry 
and anti-Semitism by exposing extremist groups and individuals who 
spread hate and incite violence. Today, ADL is the foremost non-
governmental authority on domestic terrorism, extremism, hate groups, 
and hate crimes. ADL plays a leading role in exposing extremist 
movements and activities, while helping communities and government 
agencies alike in combating them. ADL's team of experts--analysts, 
investigators, researchers, and linguists--use cutting-edge 
technologies and investigative techniques to track and disrupt 
extremists and extremist movements worldwide. ADL provides law 
enforcement officials and the public with extensive resources, 
including analytic reports on extremist trends and databases of Hate 
Symbols and Terror Symbols that can help alert online platforms of 
problematic content.
White Supremacy and Mass Shootings \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ Datasets for this section are available on ADL's HEAT Map: ADL, 
ADL H.E.A.T Map, updated June 19, 2019, https://www.adl.org/education-
and-resources/resource-knowledge-base/adl-heat-map.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    When white supremacist Robert Bowers entered the Tree of Life 
Synagogue in Pittsburgh in October 2018 to launch a killing spree 
against Jews attending services, taking 11 lives and wounding seven 
more, his senseless and hate-fueled violence directly impacted not just 
the victims' families, friends and neighbors, but all residents of 
Pittsburgh--and communities nationwide and around the world. The 
deadliest attack against American Jews, unfortunately, was only one of 
many in the past year tied to a white supremacist ideology that has 
found fertile ground online with consequences affecting not only 
Americans but people around the world. Extremist-related killings are 
comparatively few when compared to the total number of homicides in the 
U.S. each year. Nevertheless, such killings, especially when they are 
committed as hate crimes or terrorist attacks, can send shock waves 
through entire communities--and beyond. A list of selected white 
supremacist shooting sprees is included at the end of this document.
    Recent analysis by ADL's Center on Extremism shows that domestic 
extremists took the lives of at least 50 people in 2018, a sharp 
increase from the 37 people killed by extremists in 2017. In fact, 2018 
is the fourth-deadliest year since 1970, behind only 1995 (which saw 
184 deaths, most attributed to the Oklahoma City bombing), 2016 (72 
deaths) and 2015 (70 deaths).
    2018's high death toll is due in large part to the number of 
shooting sprees by extremists. In 2017, only one extremist-related 
shooting spree occurred; in 2018, there were five shooting sprees 
collectively responsible for 38 deaths and 33 wounded. There were fewer 
lethal incidents in 2018 than in 2017 (17 compared to 21), but the 
events were significantly deadlier--and the 2018 shooting sprees were 
responsible for most of the deaths.
    These attacks are in large part intensified by the use of guns. In 
both high-and low-casualty attacks, domestic extremists used guns in 42 
of the 50 murders they committed in 2018, far outpacing edged weapons 
or physical assaults. Over the past ten years, firearms were used in 73 
percent of domestic extremist-related killings in the United States. 
Guns are the weapon of choice among America's extremist murderers, 
regardless of their ideology.
    White supremacists were responsible for the great majority of 
extremist-related killings in 2018, which is the case almost every 
year. Right-wing extremists were responsible for 49 (or 98 percent) of 
the 50 domestic extremist-related killings in 2018, with white 
supremacists alone accounting for 39 (or 78 percent) of those murders.
Hate Crimes in America
    While most anti-Semitic incidents are not directly perpetrated by 
extremists or white supremacists, there are important connections 
between the trends. We found in our annual Audit of Anti-Semitic 
Incidents that in 2018, 249 acts of anti-Semitism (13 percent of the 
total incidents) were attributable to known extremist groups or 
individuals inspired by extremist ideology, making it the highest level 
of anti-Semitic incidents with known connections to extremists or 
extremist groups since 2004.\2\ Of those, 139 incidents were part of 
fliering campaigns by white supremacist groups. Another 80 were anti-
Semitic robocalls allegedly perpetrated by anti-Semitic podcaster Scott 
Rhodes in support of the candidacy of Patrick Little, an unabashed 
white supremacist who ran an unsuccessful campaign for U.S. Senate in 
California.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \2\ ADL, 2018 Audit of Anti-Semitic Incidents, https://www.adl.org/
audit2018, April 2019.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The Audit also noted spikes at several points during the year. The 
final three months of the year were unusually active, with 255 
incidents in October, 300 in November and 194 in December. The high 
number in October included 45 propaganda distributions by white 
supremacists. The incidents in November and December immediately 
followed the Pittsburgh massacre, which likely drew more attention to 
anti-Semitic activities. Incidents first spiked in May, when 209 anti-
Semitic acts were reported, including 80 anti-Semitic robocalls sent by 
white supremacists, which targeted Jewish individuals and institutions 
with harassing messages.
    Hate crimes are only an element of the anti-Semitic incidents that 
we track. The most recent data about hate crimes made available by the 
FBI is for 2017.\3\ The FBI has been tracking and documenting hate 
crimes reported from federal, state, and local law enforcement 
officials since 1991 under the Hate Crimes Statistics Act of 1990 
(HCSA). Though clearly incomplete, the Bureau's annual HCSA reports 
provide the best single national snapshot of bias-motivated criminal 
activity in the United States. The Act has also proven to be a powerful 
mechanism to confront violent bigotry, increasing public awareness of 
the problem and sparking improvements in the local response of the 
criminal justice system to hate violence--since in order to effectively 
report hate crimes, police officials must be trained to identify and 
respond to them.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \3\ FBI, 2017 Hate Crime Statistics, 2017 https://ucr.fbi.gov/hate-
crime/2017, November 2018.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The FBI documented 7,175 hate crimes reported by 16,149 law 
enforcement agencies across the country--the highest level of 
participation since the enactment of the HCSA, and a 6 percent increase 
over 2016 participation of 15,254. Of the 7,175 total incidents:

   Religion-based crimes increased 23 percent, from 1,273 in 
        2016 to 1,564 in 2017--the second highest number of religion-
        based crimes ever [only 2001, after 9/11, recorded more--
        1,828].

   Crimes directed against Jews increased 37 percent--from 684 
        in 2016 to 938 in 2017. Crimes against Jews and Jewish 
        institutions were slightly more than 13 percent of all reported 
        hate crimes--and 60 percent of the total number of reported 
        religion-based crimes. Every year since 1991, crimes against 
        Jews and Jewish institutions have been between 50 and 80 
        percent of all religion-based hate crimes.

   Race-based crimes were the most numerous (as they have been 
        every year since 1991), totaling 4,131 crimes, almost 58 
        percent of the total. Crimes against African-Americans, as 
        always, were the plurality of these crimes--2,013, about 28 
        percent of all reported hate crimes.

   Reported crimes against Muslims decreased 11 percent, from 
        307 in 2016 to 273 in 2017. However, the 273 anti-Muslim hate 
        crimes recorded was the highest reported number of crimes 
        against Muslims ever--behind 2016's 307 and 481 in 2001, after 
        the 9/11 terrorist attacks.

   Crimes directed against LGBTQ people increased from 1,076 in 
        2016 to 1,130 in 2017. Crimes directed against individuals on 
        the basis of their gender identity decreased slightly, from 124 
        in 2016 to 119 in 2017, slightly less than two percent of all 
        hate crimes.

    Importantly, only 2,040 of the 16,149 reporting agencies--less than 
13 percent--reported one or more hate crimes to the FBI. That means 
that about 87 percent of all participating police agencies 
affirmatively reported zero (0) hate crimes to the FBI (including at 
least 92 cities over 100,000). And more than 1,000 law enforcement 
agencies did not report any data to the FBI (including 9 cities over 
100,000).
    Moreover, we need to remember that these are only reported crimes. 
Many communities and individuals do not feel comfortable going to law 
enforcement for a variety of reasons, so there is likely an undercount 
of hate crimes resulting from unwillingness to report.
The Role of Online Platforms in White Supremacist Violence
    The real-world violence of extremists does not emerge from a 
vacuum. In many cases the hatred that motivates extremist violence, and 
especially these documented white supremacist murders, is nurtured in 
online forums such as Gab, 4chan, 8chan, and other platforms.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \4\ Anti-Defamation League, '' Hatechan: The Hate and Violence-
Filled Legacy of 8chan,'' ADL Blog, August 7, 2019, https://
www.adl.org/blog/hatechan-the-hate-and-violence-filled-legacy-of-8chan; 
ADL, Gab and 8chan: Home to Terrorist Plots Hiding in Plain Sight, 
https://www.adl.org/resources/reports/gab-and-8chan-home-to-terrorist-
plots-hiding-in-plain-sight.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Extremist groups are empowered by access to the online world; the 
Internet amplifies the hateful voices of the few to reach millions 
around the world. The online environment also offers community: while 
most extremists are unaffiliated with organized groups, online forums 
allow isolated extremists to become more active and involved in virtual 
campaigns of ideological recruitment and radicalization. As Internet 
proficiency and the use of social media are nearly universal, the 
efforts of terrorist and extremist movements to exploit these 
technologies and platforms to increase the accessibility of materials 
that justify and instigate violence are increasing exponentially. Both 
terrorist and extremist movements, here at home and abroad, use online 
and mobile platforms to spread their messages and to actively recruit 
adherents who live in the communities they target.
    Individuals can easily find sanction, support, and reinforcement 
online for their extreme beliefs or actions, and in some cases neatly 
packaged alongside bomb-making instructions. This enables adherents 
like violent white supremacist mass shooters such as Bowers to self-
radicalize without face-to-face contact with an established terrorist 
group or cell.
    Perhaps the most important contributor to the subculture of white 
supremacists are the so-called ``imageboards,'' a type of online 
discussion forum originally created to share images. One of the most 
prominent is 4chan, a 15-year-old imageboard whose influence extends 
far beyond the alt right, as a key source of Internet memes. Its/pol 
subforum is a disturbing site, an anarchic collection of posts that 
range from relatively innocuous to highly offensive, with most users 
posting content anonymously.
    Due in part to its extremely lax content moderation policies, 4chan 
has become home to many racists and openly and vocal white 
supremacists. Some of its imitators, such as 8chan, lean even more 
towards racism and white supremacy. Parts of Reddit, a popular website 
that contains a massive collection of subject-oriented discussion 
threads, also share the ``chan'' subculture.
    ADL has assessed that individuals do not primarily utilize 8chan 
for sharing hateful images and messages, but they also use it to turn 
real-world killings into entertainment, canonizing the perpetrators of 
previous massacres and keeping track of their respective body counts, 
like scores in a video game.
    The current ADL assessment is that at its core, 8chan is a haven 
for both violent daydreamers and real-life murderers to virtually meet, 
network and recruit more followers. This intersection poses 
considerable risk both online and in the physical world.
    Patrick Crusius, the alleged El Paso shooter charged with killing 
22 people and injuring many more, is believed to have posted a four-
page manifesto to 8chan prior to the attack. His justification for the 
deadly spree was that he was defending his country from ``cultural and 
ethnic replacement brought on by an invasion.'' \5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \5\ Anti-Defamation League, ``Mass Shooting in El Paso: What We 
Know,'' ADL Blog, August 4, 2019, https://www.adl.org/blog/mass-
shooting-in-el-paso-what-we-know.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    One of the most telling elements of Crusius's post is that in it, 
he also expressed support for Australian, white supremacist, mass-
murderer Brenton Tarrant, the accused shooter in the March 2019 mosque 
attacks in Christchurch, New Zealand that left 51 people dead.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \6\ Ibid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Like the El Paso shooter, we assess that Tarrant likely turned to 
8chan to post what he referred to as a ``explanation'' for his deadly 
rampage, providing links to his own manifesto, which he called ``The 
Great Replacement.'' In it, he fixated on the white supremacist theory 
that white European society will be overrun by migration from Muslim 
and African nations.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \7\ Anti-Defamation League, ``White Supremacist Terrorist Attacks 
at Mosques in New Zealand,'' March 15, 2019, https://www.adl.org/blog/
white-supremacist-terrorist-attack-at-mosques-in-new-zealand.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    In his manifesto, Tarrant addressed the 8chan community directly--
as if they were co-conspirators--explicitly directing them to ``do your 
part.''
    Just one month later, someone did. Before his massacre at the 
Chabad Congregation in Poway, California, the shooter posted a link to 
his own manifesto on 8chan, offering the same kind of white supremacist 
tropes and cited the Christchurch and Pittsburgh shooters for inspiring 
his own deadly attacks.
    Three white supremacist manifestos, three killing sprees. One 
targeted Muslims, another Jews, the third Latinx and immigrants. What 
these three men had in common was 8chan, the platform for their final 
messages.
    While the most extreme forms of online content normally thrive on 
platforms like 8chan, Gab, and 4chan, larger social media platforms 
like Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube must also remain vigilant. 
Extremists leverage larger mainstream platforms to ensure that the 
hateful philosophies and messages that begin to germinate on message 
boards like Gab and 8chan find a new and much larger audience. 
Twitter's 300 million users and Facebook's 2.4 billion dwarf the 
hundreds of thousands on 8chan and Gab. Extremists make use of 
mainstream platforms in specific and strategic ways to exponentially 
increase their audience while avoiding content moderation activity that 
Facebook and Twitter use to remove hateful content. These include 
creating private pages and events, sharing links that directly lead 
users to extreme content on websites like 8chan and using coded 
language called ``dogwhistles'' to imply and spread hateful ideology 
while attempting to circumvent content moderation systems.
    Since the white supremacist rally in Charlottesville in 2017 and 
subsequent attacks and murders by extremists to date, there have been 
many well-publicized efforts by the technology and social media 
companies that run mainstream social platforms and services to stem the 
tide of hate and extremism online. After Charlottesville, tech 
companies ranging from large social platforms like Facebook to payment 
processors like Paypal to cybersecurity services like Cloudflare took 
action to expel white supremacists from their services. Even so, these 
same companies and others in this market sector have been forced to 
repeatedly respond to violent white supremacist activity on their 
platforms in the past 12 months. The Christchurch video was streamed on 
Facebook live, leading Facebook to change its livestreaming policy.\8\ 
Paypal provided payment services to the fringe platform Gab, where the 
Pittsburgh shooter was believed to be radicalized, but cut off its 
services after the massacre.\9\ Cloudflare provided cybersecurity 
services to 8chan, and publicly cut it off after the site was 
implicated in the shooting in El Paso (among others).\10\ Although it 
appears that these companies and others took significant action to 
address white supremacy and hate in 2017 and claim to have continued to 
do so, ADL assesses that the above-mentioned platforms are still being 
abused, including today, by people espousing this hateful and violent 
ideology even two years later.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \8\ ``Christchurch Attacks: Facebook Curbs Live Feature,'' BBC 
News, May 15, 2019, https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-48276802.
    \9\ Adam Smith, ``GoDaddy and PayPal Ban Gab After Pittsburgh 
Shooting,'' PCMag, October 28, 2018, https://www.pcmag.com/news/364650/
godaddy-and-paypal-ban-gab-after-pittsburgh-shooting.
    \10\ Matthew Prince, ``Terminating Service for 8chan,'' Cloudflare, 
August 5, 2019, https://blog.cloudflare.com/terminating-service-for-
8chan/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Scoping the Problem
    One of the key drivers of these complicated and at times deadly 
issues is the size and scale of these platforms. For example, on 
Twitter approximately 6,000 tweets are posted every second and 
approximately 500 million tweets are posted every day. If the company's 
policies and systems operated at 99 percent effectiveness in detecting 
and responding to violent hate and extremist rhetoric, that would still 
leave five million tweets unaddressed every day. Imagine that each of 
those tweets, on the low end, reached just 60 people: those tweets 
would reach the number of people equal roughly to the population of the 
United States (330 million people) every day.
    The policies and systems of these companies are very likely not 
operating with a high degree of accuracy, leaving possibly millions of 
users exposed and impacted by hateful and extreme content every day. As 
an example, YouTube in June 2019 announced a policy change focusing on 
prohibiting white nationalist and other extremist content from existing 
on its platform.\11\ In August 2019, an ADL investigation found a 
number of prominent white nationalists and other forms of hateful 
extremists still active and easily found on the platform, despite the 
policy change.\12\ Similarly, after Facebook very publicly banned Alex 
Jones from its platforms in May 2019, Jones was quickly able to shift 
his operations to another account on the platform.\13\ These instances 
raise alarming questions about the degree to which social media 
platforms, through their own internal policies and systems, are able to 
meaningfully detect, assess, and act on hateful content at the global 
scale their platforms operate.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \11\ Casey Newton, ``YouTube Just Banned White Supremacist Content, 
and Thousands of Channels are About to be Removes,'' The Verge, June 5, 
2019, https://www.theverge.com/2019/6/5/18652576/youtube-supremacist-
content-ban-borderline-extremist-terms-of-service.
    \12\ Anti-Defamation League, ``Despite YouTube Policy Update, Anti-
Semitic, White Supremacist Channels Remain,'' ADL Blog, August 15, 
2019, https://www.adl.org/blog/despite-youtube-policy-update-anti-
semitic-white-supremacist-channels-remain.
    \13\ Craig Timberg, ``Alez Jones Banned from Facebook? His videos 
are still there--and so are his followers,'' The Washington Post, 
November 5, 2018, https://beta.washingtonpost.com/technology/2018/11/
05/alex-jones-banned-facebook-his-videos-are-still-there-so-are-his-
followers/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The U.S. Congress and American public admittedly have limited 
knowledge of just how well platforms are dealing with the problem of 
white supremacist extremism. To evaluate their efforts, civil society 
organizations like ADL can conduct limited external research similar to 
the manner mentioned above, in which we use the platform information 
that is publicly available to objectively assess the stated actions and 
policy implications of a given platform. Or we can look to the 
platforms' own limited efforts at transparency about their policies and 
practices. The mainstream social media platforms have several 
potentially relevant metrics related to the issue of extremism, 
especially white supremacist extremism, that they share in their 
regular transparency reports. These differ slightly as described by 
each platform. The metrics are self-reported by the companies, and 
there is no way to fully understand the classification of content 
categories outside of the brief descriptions given by the platforms as 
part of this reporting.
    For example, the platforms provide information related to 
terrorism. Facebook reported 6.4 million pieces of content related to 
terrorist propaganda removed from January to March 2019. This may seem 
meaningful, but it is not a particularly insightful datapoint. 
Typically, the social media platform companies are only looking at 
international terrorism from designated groups such as Al Qaeda and 
ISIS and are not including white supremacist violence and related 
activity as part of this terrorism classification.
    White supremacist content could fall under the category of hate 
speech or violent content on a platform. Twitter reported 250,806 
accounts actioned for hateful conduct and 56,577 accounts actioned for 
violent threats from July to December 2018. Yet a wide variety of other 
types of content not associated with extremism or white supremacy might 
also fall in this category, making it difficult to glean meaningful 
analysis about white supremacist content from these metrics.
    Additionally, when Facebook claims in its transparency report that 
it took action on four million pieces of hate speech from January to 
March 2019, it is difficult to understand what this means in context as 
we do not know how that compares to the level of hate speech reported 
to them, which communities are impacted by those pieces of content, or 
whether any of that content is connected with extremist activity on 
other parts of their platform.
    In order to truly assess the problem of hate and extremism on 
social media platforms, technology companies must provide meaningful 
transparency with metrics that are agreed upon and verified by trusted 
third parties, like ADL, and that give actionable information to users, 
civil society groups, governments, and other stakeholders. Meaningful 
transparency will allow stakeholders to answer questions such as: ``How 
significant is the problem of white supremacy on this platform?'' ``Is 
this platform safe for people who belong to my community?'' ``Have the 
actions taken by this company to improve the problem of hate and 
extremism on their platform had the desired impact?'' Until tech 
platforms take the collective actions to come to the table with 
external parties and meaningfully address these kinds of questions 
through their transparency efforts, our ability to understand the 
extent of the problem of hate and extremism online, or how to 
meaningfully and systematically address it, will be extremely limited.
What We Know About Online Hate and Harassment
    One way in which ADL has tried to address this gap in knowledge is 
by conducting a national representative survey on the hate and 
harassment experienced by Americans online. Our survey found that over 
half of respondents (53 percent) experienced some type of online 
harassment; 37 percent of American adults reported experiencing severe 
harassment (including physical threats, sexual harassment, stalking and 
sustained harassment), up from 18 percent in 2017.\14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \14\ ADL, Online Hate and Harassment: The American Experience, 
2019, https://www.adl.org/onlineharassment.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    We also found that identity-based harassment was most common 
against LGBTQ+ individuals, with 63 percent of LGBTQ+ respondents 
experiencing harassment because of their sexual orientation. Religious-
based harassment was very common against Muslims (35 percent) and, to a 
lesser extent, Jewish (16 percent) respondents.
    Harassment was also common among other minority groups, with race-
based harassment affecting 30 percent of Hispanics or Latinos, 27 
percent of African-Americans, and 20 percent of Asian-Americans. 
Finally, women also experienced harassment disproportionately, with 
gender identity-based harassment affecting 24 percent of female-
identified respondents, compared to 15 percent of male-identified.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \15\ Ibid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Hate and harassment are also endemic to online games. Fifty-three 
percent of the total population of the United States and 64 percent of 
the online population of the United States plays video games. Following 
our wider online survey, we surveyed Americans who play online games 
and found that 74 percent of respondents experienced some form of 
harassment while playing games online. Sixty-five percent of players 
experienced some form of severe harassment, including physical threats, 
stalking, and sustained harassment.\16\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \16\ ADL, Free to Play? Hate, Harassment, and Positive Social 
Experiences in Online Games, July 2019, https://www.adl.org/free-to-
play, page 18.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    We are also seeing an increase in extremist and white supremacist 
content within online games and gaming forums. Scholars have observed 
white supremacist recruiters actively prey on disaffected youth within 
the gaming community, and use these channels to plant seeds of hate by 
invoking sentiments of ``us versus them.'' Our survey found that nearly 
a quarter of players (23 percent) are exposed to discussions about 
white supremacist ideology and almost one in ten (9 percent) are 
exposed to discussions about Holocaust denial in online multiplayer 
games. These are alarming insights into an industry that has managed to 
avoid the intense media scrutiny that more traditional social media 
platforms have experienced.\17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \17\ Ibid, page 7.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Online hate and harassment, whether carried out by extremists or 
simply by those who feel freer to harm others by the distance and 
anonymity of being online have real-life, sometimes devastating 
consequences. Our online game survey found that 23 percent of harassed 
players become less social and 15 percent felt isolated as a result of 
in-game harassment. One in ten players had depressive or suicidal 
thoughts as a result of harassment in online multiplayer games, and 
nearly one in ten took steps to reduce the threat to their physical 
safety (8 percent).\18\ Alarmingly, nearly a third of online 
multiplayer gamers (29 percent) had been doxed--had their personal 
information shared with the goal of harassment.\19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \18\ Ibid, page 27.
    \19\ Ibid, page 18.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Our wider survey found that among those who had been targeted, or 
feared being targeted, approximately 38 percent stopped, reduced or 
changed their activities online, such as posting less often, avoiding 
certain sites, changing privacy setting, deleting apps, or increasing 
filtering of content or users. Some 15 percent took steps to reduce 
risk to their physical safety, such as moving locations, changing their 
commute, taking a self-defense class, avoiding being alone, or avoiding 
certain locations.\20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \20\ ADL, Online Hate and Harassment: The American Experience.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Our survey also found societal consequences among respondents. More 
than half (59 percent) said that online hate and harassment were making 
hate crimes more common, and half said that they are increasing the use 
of derogatory language. More than one-third (39 percent) thought that 
online hate and harassment are making young Americans lose faith in the 
country, and 30 percent believed that they are making it harder to 
stand up to hate. Some felt less comfortable in their more immediate 
environments: approximately 22 percent of Americans report that online 
hate and harassment makes them feel less safe in their community while 
18 percent feel that it makes family members trust each other less.\21\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \21\ Ibid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Critically, those surveyed wanted to see private technology 
companies take action to counter or mitigate online hate and 
harassment. Eighty-four percent said that platforms should do more, 
including making it easier for users to filter (81 percent) and report 
(76 percent) hateful and harassing content. In addition, Americans want 
companies to label comments and posts that appear to come from 
automated ``bots'' rather than people. Finally, a large percentage of 
respondents were in favor of platforms removing problematic users as 
well as having outside experts independently assess the amount of hate 
on a platform.\22\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \22\ Ibid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Over 80 percent of those surveyed wanted government to act by 
strengthening laws and improving training and resources for police on 
cyberhate. Strong support exists for these changes regardless of 
whether an individual has previously experienced online hate and 
harassment and regardless of political belief. Although respondents 
identifying as liberal reported even greater agreement with the 
actions, those identifying as conservatives overwhelmingly supported 
all the actions as well.\23\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \23\ Ibid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Moving Forward: Policy Recommendations to Counter the Threat
  1.  Bully Pulpit The President, cabinet officials, and Members of 
        Congress must call out bigotry at every opportunity. The right 
        to free speech is a core value, but the promotion of hate 
        should be vehemently rejected. Simply put, you cannot say it 
        enough: America is no place for hate.

  2.  Enforcement of Existing Laws The Administration must send loud, 
        clear, and consistent messages that violent bigotry is 
        unacceptable and ensure that the FBI and the Justice 
        Department's Civil Rights Division will enforce relevant 
        Federal laws and vigorously investigate and prosecute hate 
        crimes.

  3.  Improve Federal Hate Crime Training and Data Collection The 
        Department of Justice should incentivize and encourage state 
        and local law enforcement agencies to more comprehensively 
        collect and report hate crimes data to the FBI, with special 
        attention devoted to large underreporting law enforcement 
        agencies that either have not participated in the FBI Hate 
        Crime Statistics Act program at all or have affirmatively and 
        not credibly reported zero hate crimes. More comprehensive, 
        complete hate crime reporting can deter hate violence and 
        advance police-community relations. In addition, the 
        administration, DHS and DOJ should take steps to ensure that it 
        is efficient and safe for all victims of hate crimes to contact 
        the police. If marginalized or targeted community members--
        including immigrants, people with disabilities, LGBTQ community 
        members, Muslims, Arabs, Middle Easterners, South Asians and 
        people with limited language proficiency--cannot report, or do 
        not feel safe reporting hate crimes, law enforcement cannot 
        effectively address these crimes, thereby jeopardizing the 
        safety of all.

  4.  Legislation to Address White Supremacy and Domestic Terrorism 
        Congress must act to counter the threat of domestic terrorism 
        and prevent more attacks. No legislative action is perfect, but 
        inaction should not be an option. Congress should enact the 
        following measures:

     Domestic Terrorism Prevention Act (DTPA) (S. 894/HR 
            1931) This legislation would enhance the Federal 
            government's efforts to prevent domestic terrorism by 
            authorizing into law the offices addressing domestic 
            terrorism, and would require Federal law enforcement 
            agencies to regularly assess those threats. The bill would 
            also provide training and resources to assist non-federal 
            law enforcement in addressing these threats, requiring DOJ, 
            DHS, and the FBI to provide training and resources to 
            assist state, local, and tribal law enforcement in 
            understanding, detecting, deterring, and investigating acts 
            of domestic terrorism.

     Domestic Terrorism Documentation and Analysis of 
            Threats in America (DATA) Act (HR 3106) Data on extremism 
            and domestic terrorism is being collected by the FBI, but 
            not enough, and the reporting is insufficient and flawed. 
            Data drives policy; we cannot address what we are not 
            measuring. The DATA Act focuses on increasing the 
            coordination, accountability, and transparency of the 
            Federal government in collecting and recording data on 
            domestic terrorism.

     The Khalid Jabara and Heather Heyer National 
            Opposition to Hate, Assault, and Threats to Equality Act of 
            2019 (NO HATE Act of 2019 S. 2043/H.R. 3545) This 
            legislation would authorize incentive grants to spark 
            improved local and state hate crime training, prevention, 
            best practices, and data collection initiatives--including 
            grants for state hate crime reporting hotlines to direct 
            individuals to local law enforcement and support services.

     Disarm Hate Act (S. 1462/H.R. 2708) This legislation 
            would close the loophole that currently permits the sale of 
            firearms to individuals who have been convicted of 
            threatening a person based on their race, religion, gender, 
            sexual orientation, or disability. The measure would 
            prohibit individuals convicted of a misdemeanor hate crime 
            from obtaining a firearm.

    In addition, more consideration is needed for two additional 
initiatives that could help address white supremacy and domestic 
terrorism in the United States.

   Congress should examine whether a rights-protecting domestic 
        terrorism criminal charge is needed--and could be appropriately 
        crafted. Our Federal legal system currently lacks the means to 
        prosecute a white supremacist terrorist as a terrorist. 
        Perpetrators can be prosecuted for weapons charges, acts of 
        violence (including murder), racketeering, hate crimes, or 
        other criminal violations. But we cannot legally prosecute them 
        for what they are: terrorists. Many experts have argued that, 
        without being so empowered, there is a danger that would-be 
        domestic terrorists are more likely to be charged with lesser 
        crimes and subsequently receive lesser sentences. Congress 
        should begin immediate hearings and consultations with legal 
        and policy experts, marginalized communities, and law 
        enforcement professionals on whether it is possible to craft a 
        rights-protecting domestic terrorism statute. Any statute 
        Congress would seriously consider should include specific, 
        careful Congressional and civil liberties oversight to ensure 
        the spirit of such protections are faithfully executed.

   The State Department should examine whether certain white 
        supremacist groups operating abroad meet the specific criteria 
        to be subject to sanctions under its Designated Foreign 
        Terrorist Organization (FTO) authority. The criteria, set out 
        in 8 U.S.C. Sec. 1189(a)[1] are: (1) the 
        organization must be foreign; (2) the organization must engage 
        in terrorist activity or retain the capability and intent to 
        engage in terrorist activity or terrorism; and (3) the 
        terrorist activity or terrorism of the organization must 
        threaten the security of U.S. nationals or the national 
        security of the U.S.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \[1]\ ``8 U.S. Code Sec. 1189.Designation of foreign 
terrorist organizations,'' Cornell Law School Legal Information 
Institute, accessed September 16, 2019; (https://www.law.cornell.edu/
uscode/text/8/1189)

   None of the current 68 organizations on the FTO list is a 
        white supremacist organization.[2] And while the 
        possibility of designating white supremacist organizations 
        under the State Department's FTO authority holds promise, there 
        are some important considerations that must be taken into 
        account.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \[2]\ State Department, ``Foreign Terrorist Organizations,'' 
accessed September 16, 2019; (https://www.state.gov/foreign-terrorist-
organizations/)

   First, while several countries have added white supremacist 
        groups to their own designated terrorist lists in recent days--
        including Canada [3] and England [4]--
        white supremacist groups do not operate exactly like other 
        FTOs, such as ISIS and al-Qaeda. For example, individual white 
        supremacists that carry out attacks--wherever they are--very 
        rarely receive specific operational instructions from organized 
        white supremacist groups abroad to carry out these attacks.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \[3]\ Harmeet Kaur, ``For the first time, Canada adds white 
supremacists and neo-Nazi groups to its terror organization list,'' 
CNN, June 28, 2018, (https://www.cnn.com/2019/06/27/americas/canada-
neo-nazi-terror-organization-list-trnd/index.html)
    \[4]\ Emma Lake, ``Terror Crackdown: Which terror groups are banned 
under UK law and when was National Action added to the list?'' The Sun 
(UK), October 26, 2017 (https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/4569388/banned-
terror-groups-uk-national-action)

   These groups generally do not have training camps in Europe 
        or elsewhere where individuals travel to learn tactics and then 
        return home to carry out an attack. Instead, individuals in the 
        United States are typically motivated to act based on their own 
        white supremacist ideology, which primarily stems from domestic 
        sources of inspiration but which can sometimes also stem from 
        inspirational sources abroad--including the violent actions of 
        white supremacists--whether that foreign source is associated 
        with an organization or not. Second, in the United States, 
        unlike in Canada and England, the First Amendment provides 
        unique, broad protection for even the most vile hate speech and 
        propaganda. While clearly criminal conduct would not be 
        protected under the First Amendment, a great deal of non-
        criminal association, speech, and hateful propaganda would be 
        protected speech. The First Amendment's assembly and speech 
        protections would not permit designation of white supremacist 
        organizations operating here, but designating foreign white 
        supremacist groups could make knowingly providing material 
        support or resources to them a crime--extending authority for 
        law enforcement officials to investigate whether such a crime 
        is being planned or is occurring.[5]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \[5]\ Mary B. McCord, ``White Nationalist Killers Are Terrorists. 
We Should Fight Them Like Terrorists,'' Washington Post, Aug. 8, 2019, 
(https://www.washingtonpost.com/outlook/white-nationalist-killers-are-
terrorists-we-should-fight-them-like-terrorists/2019/08/08/3f8b761a-
b964-11e9-bad6-609f75bfd97f_story.html)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
5. Address Online Hate and Harassment
   Strengthen laws against perpetrators of online hate Hate and 
        harassment translate from real-world to online spaces, 
        including in social media and games, but our laws have not kept 
        up. Many forms of severe online misconduct are not consistently 
        covered by cybercrime, harassment, stalking and hate crime law. 
        Congress has an opportunity to lead the fight against cyberhate 
        by increasing protections for targets as well as penalties for 
        perpetrators of online misconduct. Some actions Congress can 
        take include revising Federal law to allow for penalty 
        enhancements based on cyber-related conduct; updating Federal 
        stalking and harassment statutes' intent requirement to account 
        for online behavior; and legislating specifically on 
        cybercrimes such as doxing, swatting, non-consensual 
        pornography, and deepfakes.

   Urge social media platforms to institute robust governance 
        Government officials have an important role to play in 
        encouraging social media platforms to institute robust and 
        verifiable industry-wide self-governance. This could take many 
        forms, including Congressional oversight or passing laws that 
        require certain levels of transparency and auditing. The 
        Internet plays a vital role in allowing for innovation and 
        democratizing trends, and that should be preserved. At the same 
        time the ability to use it for hateful and severely harmful 
        conduct needs to be effectively addressed.

   Improve training of law enforcement Law enforcement is a key 
        responder to online hate, especially in cases when users feel 
        they are in imminent danger. Increasing resources and training 
        for these departments is critical to ensure they can 
        effectively investigate and prosecute cyber cases and that 
        targets know they will be supported if they contact law 
        enforcement.
6. Platform Responsibility to Address Online Hate and Harassment
   Terms of Service Every social media and online game platform 
        must have clear terms of service that address hateful content 
        and harassing behavior, and clearly define consequences for 
        violations. These policies should state that the platform will 
        not tolerate hateful content or behavior based on protected 
        characteristics. They should prohibit abusive tactics such as 
        harassment, doxing and swatting. Platforms should also note 
        what the process of appeal is for users who feel their content 
        was flagged as hateful or abusive in error.

   Responsibility and Accountability Social media and online 
        game platforms should assume greater responsibility to enforce 
        their policies and to do so accurately at scale. They should 
        improve the complaint and flagging process so that it provides 
        a more consistent and speedy resolution for targets. They 
        should lessen the burden of the complaint process for users, 
        and instead proactively, swiftly, and continuously addressing 
        hateful content using a mix of artificial intelligence and 
        humans who are fluent in the relevant language and 
        knowledgeable in the social and cultural context of the 
        relevant community.

    Additionally, given the prevalence of online hate and harassment, 
        platforms should offer far more services and tools for 
        individuals facing or fearing online attack. They should 
        provide greater filtering options that allow individuals to 
        decide for themselves how much they want to see likely hateful 
        comments. They should consider the experience of individuals 
        who are being harassed in a coordinated way, and be able to 
        provide aid to these individuals in meaningful ways. They 
        should allow users to speak to a person as part of the 
        complaint process in certain, clearly defined cases. They 
        should provide user-friendly tools to help targets preserve 
        evidence and report problems to law enforcement and companies.

   Governance and Transparency Perhaps most importantly, social 
        media and online game platforms should adopt robust governance. 
        This should include regularly scheduled external, independent 
        audits so that the public knows the extent of hate and 
        harassment on a given platform. Audits should also allow the 
        public to verify that the company followed through on its 
        stated actions and assess the effectiveness of company efforts 
        over time. Companies should provide information from the audit 
        and elsewhere through more robust transparency reports. 
        Finally, companies should create independent groups of experts 
        from relevant stakeholders, including civil society, academia 
        and journalism, to help provide guidance and oversight of 
        platform policies.

    Beyond their own community guidelines, transparency efforts and 
content moderation policies, features available on social media and 
online game platforms need to be designed with anti-hate principles in 
mind. Companies need to conduct a thoughtful design process that puts 
their users first, and incorporates risk and radicalization factors 
before, and not after, tragedy strikes. Today, the most popular method 
of developing technology tools is through a Software Prototyping 
approach: an industry-wide standard that prompts companies to quickly 
release a product or feature and iterate on it over time. This approach 
completely devalues the impact of unintended design consequences. For 
example, the Christchurch shooter used Facebook's livestreaming feature 
to share his attack with the world. The feature could have been 
designed to limit or lock audiences for new or first-time streamers or 
prevent easy recording of the video.
    These kinds of attacks, designed to leverage social media to 
attract maximum attention and encourage the next attack, force us to 
reassess the threat of hateful echo chambers like 8chan as well as the 
exploitable features in mainstream platforms like Facebook--and how 
they help drive extremist violence.
Conclusion
    ADL data clearly and decisively illustrates that hate is rising 
across America. Hate has found fertile ground on online platforms, 
which disrupt societal norms, lowering the barrier of entry to peddlers 
of hate by making it anonymous and virtual. The Internet also gives 
extremists a platform and amplifies their reach, giving them easy 
access to each other and to those who might be radicalized.
    All technology and social media companies have a responsibility to 
address this hate, through the tools they use, the guidelines they set, 
the transparency they offer, their engagement with civil society and 
the way they design their platforms.
    But we cannot solve the scourge of hate in America simply by fixing 
online platforms. First, everyone who has a bully pulpit must speak out 
against such hate. We must also look at our education systems, at our 
law enforcement capacity and training and at our laws. And we must hold 
perpetrators accountable for the harm that they cause online and off.
                                 ______
                                 
Addendum: Ideological Extremist shooting sprees, 2009-2019
    The following is a sampling of white supremacist shooting sprees 
which took place between 2009 and 2019 compiled by ADL's Center on 
Extremism. More information and statistics about extremist violence of 
all ideological backgrounds in the U.S. is available at https://
www.adl.org/education-and-resources/resource-knowledge-base
/adl-heat-map

    El Paso, Texas, August 2019. White supremacist Patrick Crusius was 
arrested following one of the deadliest white supremacist attacks in 
modern U.S. history, a shooting spree at an El Paso Wal-Mart targeting 
people of perceived Mexican origin or ancestry that left 22 dead and 24 
injured.

    Gilroy, California, July 2019. Santino Legan opened fire at the 
Gilroy Garlic Festival killing 3 and injuring 15 before being fatally 
wounded by police. In an Instagram post, which appears to have been 
made by Legan, he asked why towns were overcrowded and open space paved 
over to make room for ``hoards [sic] of mestizos and Silicon Valley 
white tweets.'' Legan also urged people to read the book Might is 
Right, by Ragnar Redbeard. Might is Right, or The Survival of the 
Fittest is a book argues in favor of self-interest and the primacy of 
the individual. It also attacks Christianity and Judaism, as religions 
that weaken people; non-Anglo-Saxons, as lesser races; women, as 
greatly inferior beings compared to men; urban-dwellers, as weak 
creatures; and the American concept of government based on the notion 
that all people are created equal.

    Poway, California, April 2019. White supremacist John T. Earnest 
allegedly opened fire at a synagogue in Poway, California, killing one 
person and injuring three before fleeing. He was reportedly emulating 
white supremacist Brenton Tarrant's killing spree in New Zealand in 
March 2019. Shortly after Tarrant's spree, Earnest allegedly set fire 
to a mosque in Escondido, California, leaving behind graffiti that 
referenced Brenton Tarrant's attack. People inside the mosque were able 
to put out the fire. Earnest's connection to the Escondido mosque 
attack was not known before the Poway attack.

    Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, October 2018. White supremacist Robert 
Bowers murdered 11 people and injured seven more, including four police 
officers, during services at the Tree of Life Synagogue. Bowers was a 
virulent anti-Semite who, among other things, blamed Jews for 
orchestrating the immigration of non-whites into the United States.

    Parkland, Florida, February 2018. Nikolas Cruz launched a deadly 
shooting spree at his former high school, Marjory Stoneman Douglas High 
School, killing 17 people and wounding 17 more. According to CNN, Cruz, 
19, belonged to a racist Instagram group and hated blacks and Jews, 
even claiming Jews wanted to destroy the world. Cruz also allegedly 
referred to women who engaged in interracial relationships as 
``traitors.'' A South Florida Sun-Sentinel article reported that Cruz 
had racist and Nazi symbols on his backpack and that he had etched 
swastikas onto ammunition magazines left behind at the school after the 
shooting. However, little evidence has so far emerged to suggest that 
the MSDHS shooting spree itself was conducted as a white supremacist 
attack.

    Reston, Virginia, December 2017. Accused white supremacist teen 
Nicholas Giampa allegedly shot and killed his girlfriend's parents 
after they became upset by his rumored neo-Nazi views. Giampa, was, at 
the very least, influenced by Atomwaffen and praised Mason's book, 
Siege, a book based on a collection of newsletters written by neo-Nazi 
James Mason in the 1980s. Giampa retweeted material from the ``Siege 
Culture'' website and at least one Atomwaffen photo. He also admired 
someone named ``Ryan Atomwaffen'' for his white supremacist book 
collection.

    Aztec, New Mexico, December 2017. White supremacist David Atchison 
disguised himself as a student in order to conduct a school shooting at 
a local high school, where he killed two students before killing 
himself.

    Mesa, Arizona, March 2015. White supremacist Ryan Elliott Giroux 
killed one and injured five others during a shooting spree in Mesa. The 
shootings began at a hotel where two people were shot, one fatally. 
Giroux then went to a nearby restaurant where he shot a woman and stole 
a car. Other shootings occurred as he tried to evade apprehension.

    Charleston, South Carolina, June 2015. White supremacist Dylann 
Storm Roof conducted a deadly shooting spree at the AME Emanuel Church 
in Charleston, killing nine people. Roof deliberately targeted the 
church because its parishioners were African-American; he hoped to 
incite a ``race war'' that he thought whites would win. Roof had 
written a racist and anti-Semitic manifesto prior to carrying out the 
attack. Both Federal and state authorities charged Roof in connection 
with the massacre; in January 2017, Roof was convicted of the Federal 
charges against him and sentenced to death.

    Lafayette, Louisiana, July 2015. White supremacist John Russell 
Houser killed himself after conducting a vicious shooting spree at a 
movie theater in Lafayette, Louisiana, that left two people dead and 
nine others injured. Houser, obsessed at the perceived moral decay of 
the United States, may have chosen the movie theater as his target 
because it was showing the Amy Schumer movie Trainwreck.

    Minneapolis, Minnesota, November 2015. Police arrested Allen 
``Lance'' Scarsella in November 2015 after Scarsella and others 
travelled to a Black Lives Matter protest in north Minneapolis, where 
Scarsella opened fire on protesters there, shooting five people, though 
none fatally. During his trial in early 2017, prosecutors showed jurors 
text messages in which Scarsella had described his intent to kill black 
people. Scarsella was convicted of 12 counts of first-degree assault 
and one count of riot.

    Austin, Texas, November 2014. Larry Steve McQuilliams of Austin, 
Texas, a suspected adherent of the racist and anti-Semitic religious 
sect known as Christian Identity, launched a shooting attack in 
downtown Austin, Texas, firing over 100 rounds of ammunition at targets 
including the Austin Police Department, a Federal court house and the 
Mexican consulate. According to police reports, McQuilliams had 
improvised explosive devices, a map of 34 other targets, including 
churches, and a copy of the Christian Identity-related book Vigilantes 
of Christendom: The Story of the Phineas Priesthood in his rental van. 
McQuilliams died at the scene after an Austin police officer shot him 
at long range.

    Overland Park, Kansas, April 2014. Long-time Missouri white 
supremacist Frazier Glenn Miller launched an attack on Jewish 
institutions in the greater Kansas City area, opening fire at two 
institutions in a shooting spree that took the lives of three people, 
including one child, before police were able to take him into custody. 
Miller told police and the media that he launched the attacks ``for the 
specific purpose of killing Jews.'' Prosecutors have indicted Miller on 
capital murder charges.

    Oak Creek, Wisconsin, August 2012. Racist skinhead Wade Michael 
Page opened fire at a Sikh temple in Oak Creek, Wisconsin, killing six 
people and wounding four others, including a police officer responding 
to the shootings. Page killed himself at the scene after being shot by 
police. Page was a member of the Hammerskins, a racist skinhead group. 
He also played in the white power bands End Apathy and Definite Hate.

    Washington, Oregon, and California, September 2011. White 
supremacists David Pedersen and Holly Grigsby engaged in a multi-state 
killing spree that resulted in four murders in three states. The couple 
murdered Pedersen's father and stepmother in Washington, a white man in 
Oregon as part of a carjacking, and an African-American male in 
California as part of another carjacking. In court, Pederson said he 
targeted the Oregon man because he believed he was Jewish and the 
Californian man because he was black. After their arrest, the couple 
admitted they had been headed to Sacramento to find a prominent Jewish 
person to kill.

    Washington, D.C., June 2009. White supremacist James von Brunn 
attacked the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington, 
D.C., entering the facility and opening fire on security guards inside, 
shooting and killing one of them. Two other security guards returned 
fire, wounding von Brunn and preventing further deaths. Von Brunn was 
arrested and charged with murder. He died of natural causes while 
awaiting trial.

    Boston, Massachusetts, January 2009. White supremacist Keith Luke 
embarked upon a spree of murderous violence against ethnic and 
religious minorities in the Boston area in early 2009. He raped and 
shot an African immigrant, and shot and killed her sister, who had 
tried to help her. Shortly thereafter, he shot and killed a homeless 
African immigrant. Although he planned to go to a synagogue that 
evening to kill as many Jews as possible, then commit suicide, police 
intercepted him before he could do so. Luke fired at police during a 
chase before he crashed his vehicle. Police subsequently arrested him 
without incident. Luke was convicted of murder in 2013 and killed 
himself in prison the following year.

    The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Selim. To Ms. Bickert, Mr. 
Pickles and Mr. Slater, on your platforms, how do you define 
violent content? How do you define extreme content Ms. Bickert?
    Ms. Bickert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We will remove any 
content that celebrates a violent act, and this is a serious 
physical injury or death of another person. We also will remove 
any organization that has proclaimed a violent mission or is 
engaged in acts of violence. We also don't allow anybody who 
has engaged in organized hate to have a presence on the site, 
and we remove hate speech. And hate speech we define as an 
attack on a person based on his or her characteristics, like 
race, religion, sexual orientation, gender. We list them out in 
our policies.
    The Chairman. Harder to define extreme than violent, is 
that correct?
    Ms. Bickert. Yes, and we see different people use that word 
in different ways. Senator, so what we do is any organization 
that has proclaimed violent mission or engaged in documented 
acts of violence, we remove them. It doesn't matter what the 
reason is for the violence, we just do not allow the violence 
period.
    The Chairman. Mr. Pickles, what is your platform's 
definition of extreme?
    Mr. Pickles. So, similar to Facebook. Agree that the word 
extremism itself is very subjective. And in some context can be 
a positive thing. People who are extremely active on this issue 
and itself is not a bad thing. And so we have a three stage 
test that defines violent extremist groups, and that test is 
that we identify through their stated purpose publications or 
actions as extremists, then engage in violence, so they 
actually may currently be involved in violence presently, or 
they promote violence as a means to further their cause, and 
they target civilians.
    So we have got that three-stage test of both the ideology 
and the violence, because we believe that that framing allows 
us to protect speech and to protect debates but also remove 
violent extremist from our platform. We then have a broader 
framework that prohibits, for example, threats of violence, 
call for harm, and wish of harm against people that is much 
broader. And again not dependent on ideology.
    The Chairman. Mr. Slater, can you add any nuances to----
    Mr. Slater. Thank you, Chairman. Broadly similar in that we 
ban designated foreign terrorist organizations from using our 
platform as well as incitement of violence, glorification of 
violence, encouragement to violence, and of course hate speech. 
So broadly similar lines.
    The Chairman. Now, Mr. Selim has suggested that your three 
platforms need to be more transparent. What do you say to that, 
Mr. Slater?
    Mr. Slater. Thank you Chairman. And I think transparency is 
the bedrock of the work we do, particularly around online 
content and to try and help people understand both what the 
rules are and how we are enforcing them. It is something we 
need to continue to get better on. Look forward to working with 
this Committee, and Mr. Selim and others on that. We have in 
the last year on YouTube provided our YouTube community 
guidelines enforcement report, where you can go and see how 
many videos we have removed in a quarter, for what reasons, 
which were flagged by machines versus users, and we break that 
down by violent extremism, hate speech, child safety, and other 
issues. So I think this is a really key issue and we look 
forward to continuing to improve.
    The Chairman. Mr. Selim before I ask Ms. Bickert and Mr. 
Pickles to respond, perhaps you could help them understand how 
you frankly don't believe they are quite transparent enough at 
this point.
    Mr. Selim. Mr. Chairman, thank you for your question. To be 
clear, the point I am making on transparency is to make sure 
that there are more clearly delineated categories between the 
point that Mr. Slater was making in terms of what the machines 
or the algorithms use to remove certain types of content or 
stop it from going up in the first place and what users on any 
of these platforms go on to say, like we think this is a 
violation of the terms of service.
    There are degrees of inconsistencies across these platforms 
that are at the table as well as others. And so to get a 
holistic picture of what a certain issue may be while 
individuals may flag versus what some algorithms pull down, 
there are different consistencies in that. And so when we are 
asking for transparency, we are really looking for a much more 
balanced approach in that across all the platforms.
    The Chairman. So, Mr. Pickles, is he touching on something 
that has a point?
    Mr. Pickles. Yes. Absolutely. I think the balance between 
particularly for companies who are investing in technology 
understanding what came down because a person saw it and 
reported it versus did the content come down because technology 
found it is very important. We have now published a breakdown 
of six policy areas and the number of user reports we receive. 
It is about 11 million reports every year, but 40 percent of 
the content that we remove, we removed because technology found 
it, not because of user reports.
    The Chairman. 40 percent?
    Mr. Pickles. Yes. So telling that story in a meaningful way 
is absolutely a challenge and one that we are certainly 
investing in.
    The Chairman. What is that percentage in Facebook, Ms. 
Bickert?
    Ms. Bickert. Mr. Chairman, when it comes to violent content 
and terror content, more than 99 percent of what we remove is 
flagged by our technical tools, and we have had a productive--
--
    The Chairman. The artificial intelligence?
    Ms. Bickert. Some of it is artificial intelligence, some of 
it is image matching. So known videos where we use a software 
to reduce that to basically a digital fingerprint, and we are 
able to stop uploads of that video again. And we have worked 
with the ADL for years on this, and I think transparency is 
key. I think we would all agree. We, for the past year and a 
half, have published not only our detailed implementation 
guidelines for exactly how we define hate speech and violence, 
but also reports on exactly how much we are removing in each 
category, and how much of that like, Mr. Pickles said, how much 
of it is actually flagged by our technical tools before we get 
user reports.
    The Chairman. Thank you very much. Senator Cantwell.
    Senator Cantwell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Selim, I 
think you mentioned 8chan, but what do you think we need to do 
to monitor incitement on 8chan and other dark websites?
    Mr. Selim. So I think you can really approach this issue 
from two categories. There are a number of increased measures, 
some of which I noted in my written statement submitted to this 
Committee, that these companies as well as others can take to 
create a greater degree of transparency and standards so that 
we can have a really accurate measure of the types of hatred 
and bigotry that exists in the online environment writ at 
large. As a result of that increased or better data, we can 
make better policies that apply to content moderation, terms of 
service, et cetera. So I think really having the good data is a 
framework for better policies and better applications and 
content moderation programs.
    Senator Cantwell. So you are saying there is more that they 
can do? Social media companies, there is more that they can do?
    Mr. Selim. Yes, ma'am. There is much more that they can do.
    Senator Cantwell. I look in your statement, you include 
auditing and you know third-party evaluation for that 
transparency as well as you know responsibility, but as I 
mentioned in my opening statement, basically then drive all of 
this to a dark web that we have less access to. I am going to 
get to them and ask them a question, but what more do you think 
we should be doing together to address the hate that is taking 
place on these darker websites too?
    Mr. Selim. So a number of measures. I mean, the first is 
having our public policy be very starting from place where we 
are victim focused. We know that whether it is Pittsburgh, 
Poway, El Paso, or any of the number cities that other 
panelists and members of this committee have mentioned in their 
statements, we need to start to make measures that combat 
extremism or domestic terrorism be from preventing other such 
horrific tragedies. And in order to do that we really need to 
start from a place that prevents and has a better accounting of 
hate crimes, bias-motivated crimes, hate related incidents, 
etc.
    And when we start from that place, I think we can make 
better policy and better programs at the Federal Government, 
and State and local, and also in the private industry levels as 
well.
    Senator Cantwell. Well, one of the reasons I am definitely 
going to be, you know, calling on the Department of Justice to 
ask what more we can do in this coordination is several years 
ago Interpol, Microsoft, the others worked on trying to address 
on an international basis child pornography to better skill law 
enforcement at policing crime scenes online. And I would assume 
that the representatives today would be supportive, maybe 
helpful, maybe even financially helpful in trying to address 
these crimes as they exist today as hate crimes on the dark 
side of the web. Is that--do I have any responses from our tech 
companies here?
    Ms. Bickert. Thank you, Senator Cantwell. This is something 
that across the industry we have been working on for the past 
few years in a manner very similar to how the industry came 
together against child exploitation online. We launched the 
global GIFCT, the Global Internet Forum to Counter Terrorism, 
which both of my colleagues referred to as a way of getting 
industry to create sort of a no-go zone for this terrorist and 
violent content.
    As part of that, we trained hundreds of smaller companies 
on best practices and we make technology available to them. The 
reality is for the bigger companies, we often are able to build 
technical tools that will stop videos at the time of upload. It 
is much harder for smaller companies, which is why we provide 
technology to them. We now have 14 companies that are involved 
in a hash sharing consortium so that we can help even these 
small companies stop terrorist content at the time of upload.
    Senator Cantwell. Well, I appreciate, and I agree with Mr. 
Selim. There is more that you can do on your own sites. But 
setting that aside for a minute, what do you think we should do 
about 8chan and the dark websites? What are what do you all 
think we should do?
    Ms. Bickert. I can tell you what we do on Facebook, 
Senator, which is we ban any link that connects to 8chan pol 
where these manifestos have appeared. So those manifestos with 
the El Paso shooting, with Poway, were not available through 
Facebook.
    Senator Cantwell. I am saying what more do you think in 
Government and law enforcement working together, besides what 
you do to address this, anybody else? Mr. Pickles?
    Mr. Slater. Well, I think, to follow up on Mr. Selim's 
point, I think certainly if this criminal activity is happening 
on these platforms then a law enforcement response is primary. 
As I say, add the tools we have in our toolbox related to 
content and if people are promoting violence against 
individuals, that is criminal offenses, a law enforcement 
intervention at that point is something I think should be 
looked at. And I think if we can strengthen this industry, our 
cooperation with law enforcement, we can make sure that the 
information sharing is a strong as it needs to be to support 
those interventions.
    Senator Cantwell. So, you think we need more law 
enforcement resources addressing this issue?
    Mr. Slater. I think it is a question of both resources and 
I think again to follow Mr. Selim's point, there was a paper 
from George Washington University last week looking at the 
statutory framework around some of these spaces and if there 
are opportunities to strengthen them? And in many of the areas 
Mr. Selim mentioned, and again, I think that is a worthwhile 
public health policy conversation to have.
    Senator Cantwell. I definitely believe you need more law 
enforcement resources on this issue, and I look at what 
progress we made with Interpol and the tech industry fighting 
on other issues. I think this is something, and I hear that 
from Mr. Selim, more resources. So, thank you all very much. 
Mr. Chairman.
    The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Cantwell.
    Senator Fischer.

                STATEMENT OF HON. DEB FISCHER, 
                   U.S. SENATOR FROM NEBRASKA

    Senator Fischer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In June, Senator 
Thune held a subcommittee hearing on persuasive design, and as 
we discussed, Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube are engineered to 
track, capture, and keep our attention, whether it is through 
predictions of the next video to keep us watching or what 
content to push, to the top of our news feeds. I think we have 
to realize that when social media platforms fail to block 
extremist content online, this content doesn't just slip 
through the cracks, it is amplified, and it is amplified to a 
wider audience.
    And we saw those effects during the Christchurch shooting. 
The New Zealand's terrorists Facebook live broadcast was up for 
an hour, that was confirmed by The Wall Street Journal, before 
it was removed, and it gained thousands of views during that 
timeframe. Ms. Bickert, how do you concentrate on the increased 
risk from how your algorithms boost content while gaps still 
exists in getting dangerous content off the platform? You 
touched on that a little bit in your response to Senator 
Wicker, but how are you targeting solutions to address that 
specific tension that we see?
    Ms. Bickert. Senator, thank you for the question. It is a 
real area of focus, and there are three things that we are 
doing. Probably the most significant is technological 
improvements, which I will come back to in a second. Second is 
making sure that we are staffed to very quickly review reports 
that come in. So the Christchurch video, once that was reported 
to us by law enforcement, we were able to remove it within 
minutes. That response time is critical to stopping the 
virality you mentioned.
    And finally, partnerships. We have hundreds of safety and 
civil society organizations that we partner with. So if they 
are seeing something, they can flag it for us through a special 
channel. Now, going back to the technology briefly, with the 
horrific Christchurch video, one of the challenges for us was 
that our artificial intelligence tools did not spot violence in 
the video. What we are doing going forward is working with law 
enforcement agencies, including in the U.S. and the UK, to try 
to gather videos that could be helpful training data for our 
technical tools, and that is just one of the many efforts.
    We have to try to improve these machine learning 
technologies so that we can stop the next viral video at the 
time of upload or the time of creation.
    Senator Fischer. When you talk about working with law 
enforcement, you said law enforcement contacted you, is that 
reciprocal? Do you see something show up and then you in turn 
try to get it to law enforcement as soon as possible so that 
individuals can be identified? What is the working relationship 
there?
    Ms. Bickert. Absolutely. Senator. We have a team that is 
our law enforcement outreach team. Anytime that we identify a 
credible threat of imminent harm, we will reach out proactively 
to law enforcement agencies. And we do that regularly. Also 
when there is some sort of mass violence incident, we reach out 
to them, even if we have no indication that our service is 
involved at all, we want to make sure the lines of 
communication are open. They know how to submit emergency 
process to us. We respond around the clock in a very timely 
fashion because we know that every minute is critical in this 
type of situation. I am a former prosecutor myself and so these 
things are very personal to me.
    Senator Fischer. I know that the platforms that are 
represented here today, you have increased your efforts to take 
down this harmful content, but as we know there are still 
shortfalls that exist in order to get that response made in not 
just a timely manner but one that is really going to truly have 
an effect. Mr. Slater, when it comes to liability, do media 
platforms--you guys need more skin in the game so that you can 
ensure better accountability and be able to incentivize some 
kind of timely solution?
    Mr. Pickles. Thank you, Senator, for the question. I think 
if you look at the practices that we are all investing in, 
certainly looking from our perspective, and the way we are 
getting better over time. The current legal framework strikes a 
reasonable balance.
    In particular, it both provides protection from liability 
that would go too far that would be overbroad but also acts as 
a sword not just a shield, empowering us and giving us the 
legal certainty that we need to invest in these technologies, 
the people to monitor or detect, review, and remove this sort 
of violative content. That way the legal framework continues to 
work well.
    Senator Fischer. Mr. Selim, can you comment on this as 
well? Do you think there is enough legal motivation for social 
media platforms to prioritize some kind of solutions out there? 
I mean, that is what this hearing is about to find the 
solutions so that we can curb that online hate that I think 
continues to grow.
    Mr. Selim. When thinking through the issues of content 
moderation, the authorities that exist within the current legal 
frameworks that reside within the companies represented at this 
table is sufficient for them to take actions on issues of 
content moderation, transparency reporting, etc. So there 
certainly is a degree of legal authorities that affords these 
companies as well as others the opportunity to take any number 
of measures.
    Senator Fischer. Ms. Bickert, in your testimony you say 
that Facebook live will ban a user for 30 days for first-time 
violation of its platform policies. Is that enough? Can users 
be banned permanently? Would that be something to look at?
    Ms. Bickert. Senator, thank you for the question. One 
serious violation will lead to a temporary removal of the 
ability to use live. However, if we see repeated serious 
violations, we simply take that person's accounts away, and 
that is something that we do across the board not just with 
hate and inciting content, but other content as well.
    Senator Fischer. Thank you.
    The Chairman. Thank you so much, Senator Fisher.
    Senator Blumenthal.

             STATEMENT OF HON. RICHARD BLUMENTHAL, 
                 U.S. SENATOR FROM CONNECTICUT

    Senator Blumenthal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all 
for being here today and thank you for outlining the increased 
attention and intensity of effort that you are providing to 
this very profoundly significant area. I welcome that you are 
doing more and trying to do it better, but I would suggest that 
even more needs to be done and it needs to be better, and you 
have the resources and technological capabilities to do more 
and better.
    And just to take the question that Senator Fischer asked of 
you, Mr. Selim, about incentives. Your answer was that they 
have authority to provide them with opportunities. The question 
is, really don't they need more incentives to do more and do it 
better, to prevent this kind of mass violence that may be 
spurred by hate speech appearing on the site or in fact may 
actually be a signal of violence to come?
    And I just want to highlight that 80 percent of all 
perpetrators of mass violence provide clear signals and signs 
that they are about to kill people. That is the reason that 
Senator Graham and I have a bipartisan measure to provide 
incentives to more states to adopt extreme risk protection 
order laws that will, in fact, give law enforcement the 
information they need to take guns away from people who are 
dangerous to themselves or others.
    And that information is so critically important to prevent 
mass violence, but also suicides, domestic violence, and the 
keys and information and signals often appear on the internet. 
In fact just this past December in Monroe, Washington a clearly 
troubled young man made a series of anti-Semitic rants and 
violent posts online. He bragged about planning to ``shoot up 
an expletive school'' in a video while armed with an AR-15 
style weapon, and on Facebook posted that he was ``shooting for 
30 Jews.''
    Fortunately, the ADL saw that post, it went to the FBI, and 
the ADL's vigilance prevented another Parkland or Tree of Life 
attack. Fred Gutenberg of Coral Springs, Florida met with me 
yesterday, told me about a similar incident involving a young 
man in Coral Springs who said he was about to shoot up the high 
school there, and law enforcement was able to foresaw it using 
an extreme risk protection order statute.
    So my question is to Facebook, Twitter, and Google, what 
more can you do to make sure that these kinds of signs and 
signals involving references to guns, it may not be hate 
speech, but it is references to possible violence with guns or 
use of guns, to make that available to law enforcement? Ms. 
Bickert, and Mr. Pickles, and Mr. Slater.
    Ms. Bickert. Thank you, Senator Blumenthal. One of the 
biggest things we can do is engage with law enforcement to find 
out what is working in our relationship and what isn't, and 
that is the dialogue that over the past years has led to us 
establishing a portal through which they can electronically 
submit request for content with legal process and we can 
respond very quickly----
    Senator Blumenthal. But what are you doing proactively? And 
I apologize for interrupting, but my time is limited. 
Proactively, what are you doing with the technology you have to 
identify the signs and signals that somebody is about to use a 
gun in a dangerous way? That someone is dangerous to himself or 
others and is about to use a gun?
    Ms. Bickert. Senator, we are now using technology to try to 
identify any of those early signs, including gun violence, but 
also suicide or self-injury.
    Senator Blumenthal. Do you report it to law enforcement?
    Ms. Bickert. We do. In 2018, we referred a number of many 
cases of suicide or self-injury, but we detected them using 
artificial intelligence to law enforcement so that they were 
able to then intervene, and in many cases, save lives.
    Mr. Pickles. We have is a very similar approach where we 
have a credible threat that something, someone is at risk to 
others or themselves. We work with the FBI to ensure they have 
the information they need.
    Senator Blumenthal. Mr. Slater?
    Mr. Slater. Thank you, Senator. Similarly, when we have a 
good faith belief of a credible threat, then we will 
proactively refer to the Northern California Regional 
Intelligence Center who will then fan that out to the right 
authorities.
    Senator Blumenthal. Because my time has expired, I am going 
to ask each of you if you would please give me more details in 
writing as a follow up for how you--what identification signs 
you use, what kind of technology, and how you think it can be 
improved assuming that the Congress approves, as I hope it 
will, the emergency risk protection order statute to provide 
incentives to more than just the 18 states that have them now, 
but others to do the same. Thank you.
    The Chairman. Thank you so much, Senator Blumenthal.
    Senator Thune.

                 STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN THUNE, 
                 U.S. SENATOR FROM SOUTH DAKOTA

    Senator Thune. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank all of 
you for being here today. Your participation in this hearing is 
appreciated as this Committee continues its oversight of the 
difficult tasks each of your companies face preserving an 
openness on your platforms while seeking to responsibly manage 
and thwart the actions of those who use your services to spread 
extremist and violent content. Last Congress, we held a hearing 
looking at terrorist recruitment propaganda online.
    We discussed the cross sharing of information between 
Facebook, Microsoft, Twitter, and YouTube which allowed each of 
those companies to identify potential extremism faster and more 
efficiently. So I would just direct this question and ask that 
how effective is that shared database of hashes been?
    Ms. Bickert. Senator, thank you for the question. Through 
the shared data base, we now have more than 200,000 distinct 
hashes of terror propaganda, and that has allowed--I can speak 
for Facebook only, but that has allowed us at Facebook to 
remove a lot more than we otherwise would have been able to do.
    Mr. Pickles. I would just add, since that hearing actually, 
I think the reassuring thing is that we don't just share hashes 
now. We have grown that partnership, so we share URLs. So if we 
see a link to a piece of content like a manifesto, we are able 
to share that across industry. And furthermore, I think an area 
that after Christchurch we recognize we need to improve, we now 
have real-time communications in a crisis.
    So industry can talk to each other in real time, 
operationally to say, even you know, not content related but 
situational awareness, that partnership between industry now 
also involves law enforcement. That wasn't there when I think 
we had that hearing last, and so I think it not just about the 
hash program but broadening our new programs that are 
developing that work further.
    Mr. Slater. Yes, I think broadly, I would say look at how 
we have been improving over time. Surely systems are not 
perfect. We are always going to have to evolve to deal with bad 
actors, but I think on the whole, we are doing a better job in 
part because of this technology sharing, this information 
sharing, in removing the sort of content before it has wide 
exposure of any sort or is viewed widely.
    Mr. Selim. Senator, I would only add that the threat 
environment that we are in today as a country has changed and 
evolved in the past 24 to 36 months. And likewise, the tactics 
and techniques that these platforms as well as others use to 
evolve, the evolving nature of the terrorist landscape online, 
whether it be foreign or domestic, needs to keep pace with the 
threat environment that we are in today.
    Senator Thune. And so just as a follow-up, are there 
similar partnerships among your companies as well as the 
smaller platforms to specifically identify mass violence?
    Ms. Bickert. Senator, one of the things that we have done 
over time is expand the mandate of the Global Internet Forum to 
Counter Terrorism. So we relatively recently expanded to 
include mass violent incidents, and we are now sharing both 
through our crisis incident protocol and our hash sharing, we 
are sharing a broader variety of violent incidents.
    Senator Thune. Mr. Slater, YouTube's, I should say, 
automated recommendation systems comes under criticism for 
potentially steering users toward increasingly violent content, 
and earlier this year, I led a subcommittee hearing examining 
the use of persuasive technologies on Internet platforms, 
algorithm transparency, and algorithmic content selection. I 
asked the witness that Google provided at that time for that 
hearing several specific questions for the record about YouTube 
that were not thoroughly answered, and I would just say that 
providing complete answers to questions members submit for the 
record is essential as we look to work together as partners to 
combat many of the issues discussed here today.
    So I would like your commitment to provide thorough 
responses to any questions you might get for the record. Do I 
have that?
    Mr. Slater. Surely, Senator, to the best of our ability.
    Senator Thune. OK. In addition, I would like to just 
explore the nexus between persuasive technologies and today's 
topic, specifically what percentage of YouTube video views are 
the result of YouTube automatically suggesting or playing 
another video after the user finishes watching the video?
    Mr. Slater. So I do not have a specific statistic there, 
but I can say the purpose of our watch next, our recommendation 
system, is to show people videos they may like that are similar 
to what they have watched before. At the same time we do 
recognize this concern about recommendations for borderline 
content that is content that maybe is not removed but brushes 
right up against those lines. And we have introduced changes 
this year to reduce recommendations for those sort of 
borderline videos.
    Senator Thune. Could you get the number? And I assume you 
have that somewhere. That has got to be available and furnished 
for the record, but so the question again is to ask you 
specifically what is YouTube doing to address the risk that 
some of these features which as, you note, are pointing a user 
in the direction of increasingly violent content?
    Mr. Slater. Yes, and that change we made in January to 
reduce recommendations has been key. And it is still in its 
early days, but it is working. We have reduced the views from 
those recommendations for that borderline content by 50 percent 
just since January. As those systems get better, we hope that 
that will improve and happy to discuss it further.
    Senator Thune. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Thune. Now based on 
presence at the gavel, we next have Senator Blackburn followed 
by Senator Scott.
    Senator Blackburn.

              STATEMENT OF HON. MARSHA BLACKBURN, 
                  U.S. SENATOR FROM TENNESSEE

    Senator Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to 
thank each of you for being here this morning and for talking 
with us. This Committee has looked at this issue on the 
algorithms and their utilization for some time and we are going 
to continue to do this. Looking at content and the extremists 
content that is online is certainly important. We know there 
are a host of solutions that are out there, and we need to come 
to an agreement and an understanding of how you are going to 
use these technologies to really protect our citizens.
    And social media companies are in a sense open public 
forums, and they should be where people can interact with one 
another. And part of your responsibility in this vein is to 
have an objective cop on the beat and be able to see what is 
happening because you are looking at it in real time. But what 
has unfortunately happened many times is you don't get an 
objective view, you don't get a consistent view, you get a 
subjective view. And this is problematic, and it leads to 
confusion by the public that is using the virtual space for 
entertainment, for their transactional life, for obtaining 
their news.
    So indeed as we look at this issue, we are looking for you 
to approach it in a consistent and objective manner. And we 
welcome the opportunity to visit with you today. Ms. Bickert, I 
have got a couple of things that I wanted to talk with you 
about. We have all heard about these third-party facilities 
where contractors are working long hours and they are looking 
at grotesque and violent images, and they are doing this day in 
and day out. So talk a little bit about how you transition from 
that to using modern technologies.
    What Facebook is going to do in order to capture this, to 
extract it and to minimize harm. You have talked about you have 
got 30,000 employees that are working on safety and security, 
and then there are third-party entities that are working on 
this. So let's talk about that impact on the individuals and 
then talk about the use of technologies to speed up this 
process and to make it more consistent and accurate.
    Ms. Bickert. Thank you for the question, Senator. Making 
sure that we are enforcing our policies is a priority for us, 
making sure that our content reviewers are healthy and safe in 
their jobs is paramount. And so one of the things that we do is 
we make sure that we are using technology to make their jobs 
easier and to limit the amount of content, types of content 
that they have to see. I will give you a couple examples with 
child exploitation videos, with graphic violence, with terror 
propaganda. We are now able to use technology to review a lot 
of that content so that people don't have to. And in situations 
where----
    Senator Blackburn. Let me ask you this, I am sorry to 
interrupt, but we need to move forward, your 30,000 reviewers, 
are they all located in Palo Alto or are they scattered around 
the country, or around the globe?
    Ms. Bickert. No Senator, the more than 50--we have 30,000 
people working in safety and security. Some of them are 
engineers or lawyers. The content reviewers, we have more than 
15,000. They are based around the world.
    Senator Blackburn. OK. Yes, great.
    Ms. Bickert. And for any of them, not only are we using 
technology, and there are ways that we are using even where we 
cannot make a decision on the content using technology alone, 
there are things we can do like removing the volume or 
separating a video into still frames, that can make the 
experience better for the reviewer.
    Senator Blackburn. OK. Now, let me ask you about this. Mark 
Zuckerberg in a Washington Post op-ed had called for us to 
regulate, to define ``lawful but awful'' speech. So tell me how 
you think you could define, or we could define lawful but awful 
speech but not overreach or infringe on somebody's First 
Amendment, free speech rights?
    Ms. Bickert. Senator, one of the things that we are looking 
to with our dialogue with Government is clarity on the actions 
that Government wants us to take. So we have our set of 
policies that lays out very clearly how we define things, but 
we don't do that in a vacuum. We do that with a lot of input 
from civil society organizations and academics around the world 
but we also like to hear the views from governments so we can 
make sure we are mindful of all of the different safety----
    Senator Blackburn. No, ours are constitutionally based. I 
am out of time. Mr. Pickles, I am going to submit a question to 
you for the record. Mr. Selim, I have got one that I am going 
to send to you. Mr. Slater, I always have questions for Google, 
so you can depend on me to get one to you and we do hope that 
you all are addressing your prioritization issues also. With 
that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
    The Chairman. Thank you very much.
    Senator Scott.

                 STATEMENT OF HON. RICK SCOTT, 
                   U.S. SENATOR FROM FLORIDA

    Senator Scott. Thank you for being here today. I am glad we 
are having a meaningful conversation about what is happening in 
our Nation. It is time we face the fact that our culture has 
produced an underclass of predominantly white young men who 
place no value on human life. These individuals live 
purposeless lives of anonymity and digital dependency, and 
increasingly act on their most evil desires, sometimes with 
racial hatred. As you all know, while I was Governor, we had 
the horrible shooting at the school in Parkland.
    Within three weeks we passed historic legislation, 
including the risk protection orders that Senator Blumenthal 
was talking about. We did it by sitting down with law 
enforcement, mental health counselors, and educators to come up 
with the right solution. Now with regard to the shooting at 
Parkland, the killer, Nicholas Cruz, had a long, long history 
of violent behavior. In September 2017, the FBI learned that 
someone with the username Nicholas Cruz had posted a comment on 
a YouTube video that said, ``I am going to be a professional 
school shooter.''
    And Nicholas Cruz made other threatening comments on 
various platforms. The individual whose video Nicholas Cruz 
posted this comment on reported it to the FBI. Unfortunately, 
the FBI closed the investigation after 16 days without ever 
contacting Nicholas Cruz. The FBI claimed they were unable to 
identify the person who made the comment. Unfortunately, we now 
have 17 innocent lives that were lost because of Nicholas Cruz.
    My question is to Mr. Slater: How was it a platform like 
YouTube which is owned by Google not able to track down the IP 
address and identity of the person who made that comment? When 
did YouTube remove the comment? Did YouTube report this comment 
to law enforcement? If so, who and when? If you did report this 
comment to law enforcement, did you follow-up? What was the 
process, and was there any follow up to see if there was any 
corrective action?
    Mr. Slater. Senator, thank you for the question. First, it 
was a horrendous event. And you know, we strive to be vigilant, 
to invest heavily, to proactively report where we see an 
imminent threat. I don't have the details on the specific facts 
you are describing. I will be happy to get back to you, but let 
me say this going forward, looking ahead, Parkland was a moment 
that did spur us to proactively reach out to law enforcement to 
start talking about, how can we do this better?
    And that is part of how we then reached out and started 
working more closely with the Northern California Regional 
Intelligence Center to make sure that when we did have these 
good faith beliefs, we could go to a one-stop shop who could 
get it to the right law enforcement, locally rather than us 
trying to call the right people. And this is something we are 
just this month in fact, or in the last month, there was an 
incident where PBS was streaming the NewsHour on YouTube, 
somebody put a threat in the live chat.
    We refer that to the Regional Intelligence Center, and they 
refer it to the Orlando Police who then took the person into 
custody appropriately. And this was reported in the news. So 
that is not to say things are perfect. We always have to strive 
to get better and I look forward to working with you and law 
enforcement on that. But I do think that we continue to improve 
over time.
    Senator Scott. So with regard to Nicholas Cruz, you will 
give me the information of, you know, who did you contact, when 
did you contact, when was it taken down? So to this day I 
cannot get an answer on what anybody did with regard to this 
shooter. What YouTube did, what the FBI did, nobody wants to 
talk about it, which is fascinating to me. So if you give me 
that information.
    And then second, are you comfortable that if another 
Nicholas Cruz put something up, you have the process now that 
you will contact somebody and there will be a follow-up 
process?
    Mr. Slater. Senator, I think our processes are getting 
better all the time. They are robust. I think this is an area 
where it is an evolving challenge, both because technology 
evolves, because people's tactics evolve. They might use code 
words, and so on, but I would be happy to follow up with the 
team and get more information on how those practices operate 
and how we continue to work together.
    Senator Scott. Thank you. Mr. Pickles, how can Nicolas 
Maduro, who is committing genocide against his citizens, who is 
withholding clean water, food, and medicine still have a 
Twitter account with 3.7 million followers?
    Mr. Pickles. Well, you rightly highlight that the behavior 
that is being taken there is abhorrent and the question for us, 
as a public company that provides a public space for dialogue 
is, is someone breaking our rules on our service? We recognize 
that there are situations where there are geopolitical 
circumstances where there are world leaders who have Twitter 
accounts in countries where Twitter has blocked, where there is 
no free speech, and so we do take a view that and we hope that 
the dialogue that that person being on the platform starts, 
helps contribute to solving the challenges that you have 
outlined.
    Senator Scott. But he has been doing it for a long time and 
it is not getting better in Venezuela, it is getting worse.
    Mr. Pickles. And I think this is a good illustration of how 
the role technology companies along with other parts of public 
policy responses. And If we remove that person's account, it 
would not change the facts on the ground. And so we need to 
bear in mind how did the other levers come into play.
    Senator Scott. I completely disagree. Maduro sits there and 
talks about things and continues to act like he is a world 
leader, and he is a pariah. And it sure seems to me that what 
you are doing is allowing him to continue to do that.
    Mr. Pickles. Well, as I said, his current account has not 
broken all the rules. Were he to break all rules, he would be 
treated the same as every other user, and we would take action 
when necessary.
    Senator Cantwell. Mr. Chairman, I know that we have votes 
already starting and you are trying to get other people. I 
would be happy to work with the Senator from Florida on this 
issue. I do think that we are not doing enough, and I think 
this specific case I mentioned in my opening statement about 
the Rohingya and what happened on Facebook is another example, 
so happy to work with you on this issue.
    The Chairman. Well, yes, and thank you, Senator Cantwell, 
and thank you Senator Scott for raising this. I am told there 
is a vote on, and I am shocked to hear that they are going to 
leave it open till 11:30 a.m., which is generally what happens.
    Senator Duckworth.

              STATEMENT OF HON. TAMMY DUCKWORTH, 
                   U.S. SENATOR FROM ILLINOIS

    Senator Duckworth. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. While I do 
appreciate this Committee's consideration of issues at the 
intersection of extremism and social media, many I think would 
agree that today's hearing is another data point on a long 
history of congressional hand-wringing on gun violence.
    According to the gun violence archive, since 2019 began, 
260 days ago, we have witnessed 318 mass shootings in the U.S., 
more than one per day. Mass shootings are those in which at 
least four people are shot, excluding the shooter. After 20 
children, 6 adults, and a shooter lost their lives at Sandy 
Hook Elementary School in 2012, many elected officials 
including myself declared an end to Congressional inaction. No 
more we said, but since that day, our Nation has endured 2,226 
mass shootings. Think about that number for a minute. But here 
we are not focused on ways to stop gun violence, but rather the 
scourge of social media.
    I am not going to say that there is no connection but every 
other country on the planet has social media, video games, 
online harassment, hate groups, crime, and mental health 
issues, but they do not have mass shootings like we do. Nothing 
highlights the absurdity of Congress's inability to solve the 
gun violence crisis than seeing 318 mass shootings in 260 days, 
and then holding our hearings on extremism and social media. 
Ms. Bickert and Mr. Pickles, this is a chart from the Digital 
Marketing Institute that according to their website highlights 
the average number of hours that social media users spend on 
platforms like Facebook and Twitter.
    As you will see, the United States and our users are 
relatively middle of the pack when it comes to time spent 
online. My question to you both is this, do you agree that 
Americans use of social media is not especially unique on a per 
capita basis? In other words, are you aware of specific trends 
on your platforms to explain the amount of gun violence in the 
United States?
    The Chairman. Senator Duckworth, and this will not come out 
of your time, do sort of explain to us, because some of us 
cannot see the detail.
    Senator Duckworth. Sure, this is how much time average 
number of hours that social media users spend using social 
media each day via any device.
    The Chairman. And the arrow points to the United States?
    Senator Duckworth. To the United States. The highest is the 
Philippines. The lowest is Japan. The U.S. is right in the 
middle. So American users and I have got a four and a half year 
old and I have an 18 month old and when I get home says iPhone, 
iPhone and she is on it. She knows how to select YouTube kids 
on my phone, and she knows how to go right to what she wants to 
watch. OK, so I am just as concerned that the United States in 
terms of social media usage, which you both agree, is somewhere 
in the middle of the pack compared to the rest of the world.
    Ms. Bickert. Yes, Senator, according to the study which I 
am not more familiar with, yes.
    Senator Duckworth. In other words, are you aware, are 
either of you aware of specific trends on your platforms to 
explain the amount of gun violence in the United States?
    Mr. Pickles. No, I think your study reflects our view, 
about 80 percent of our users are outside the United States. 
And so I think you are right. The image speaks for itself.
    Senator Duckworth. Thank you. Mr. Selim, you brought up the 
role that video games can play on online hate and harassment. I 
agree with you that any dissemination of hate must be addressed 
regardless of the platform used. But if a meaningful connection 
between video games and gun violence exists, you think that the 
widespread use of video games in Japan and South Korea would 
reflect that connection, correct? If you look at this chart, I 
think there is something to be said for the availability of 
guns in the U.S.
    If you look into the amount of time that the folks in Japan 
and South Korea spend on video games is far greater than 
anywhere else. We are third, and yet if you look at the number 
of incidents of gun violence and gun deaths per every 100,000 
people in 2017, here is the U.S., but we are not the biggest 
users of video games. Would this be accurate?
    Mr. Selim. Senator, thank you for your question. I have not 
read this specific study, but I do have one data point, if I 
may share with you for just a moment, according to an ADL 
report looking at extremists related murders and homicides over 
the past decade, our research shows that 73 percent of 
extremist related murders and homicides were in fact committed 
with firearms. So to the extent that you are making the point 
that extremists with weapons results in violence and homicide, 
we have the data that backs that point up.
    Senator Duckworth. Thank you. As we are reminded daily, the 
world is full of individuals who use social media platforms to 
disparage others, cast false equivalencies, and question facts. 
Some will use the unanimity of online platforms to spread hate 
but our use of social media, video games, and other variables 
does little to explain the 2,226 mass shooting since Sandy 
Hook. The Internet has emboldened and empowered hate by 
allowing individuals to develop online communities and share 
their warped ideas, but it is our weak gun laws here in the 
U.S. that allows that hate to become lethal. There is a clear 
and undeniable connection between the number of guns in the 
United States and the number of gun deaths in our community.
    Look at this platform. This is the number of guns per 100 
people and this is the number of gun related deaths per 100,000 
people. We are up here. Here is the rest of the world. Some of 
whom use more social media than we do. Some of whom actually 
engage in more video games than we do. We are saturated in 
weaponry that was designed for war but is made available to 
nearly anyone who attends a local gun show.
    A Dayton shooter has hundred round drum. I didn't have a 
hundred round drum when I served in Iraq. We did not send 
Marines into Fallujah with hundred round drums, but yet you can 
buy them at gun shows. Look, 90 percent of Americans that agree 
that Congress should expand background checks and red flag 
laws. 60 percent of Americans agree that banning high-capacity 
ammunition clips is what we need to do.
    This is not controversial. It is well past time that Leader 
McConnell brings HRA to the House and passed bipartisan 
background checks back to the Senate floor for a vote. I hope 
Leader McConnell will also allow votes on to keep American Safe 
Act, the Extreme Risk Protection Act, the Disarm Hate Act, and 
the Domestic Terrorism Prevention Act. Each of these bills will 
keep our children and our neighbors safer. I hope my Republican 
colleagues will join in these bipartisan efforts. Thank you and 
I yield back.
    The Chairman. Senator Duckworth, let's do this so we can 
have a complete record. If you would reduce those three posters 
to a size that we can copy, and they will be admitted in the 
record at this point in the hearing without objection.
    [The information referred to follows:]

    [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
    

    

    Senator Duckworth. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, that 
is generous of you.
    The Chairman. Senator Young.

                 STATEMENT OF HON. TODD YOUNG, 
                   U.S. SENATOR FROM INDIANA

    Senator Young. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank all 
of our panelists for being here today. I really do appreciate 
your testimony and your answering our questions. Look, we all 
need to collaborate in curbing online extremism, which I 
understand to be one of multiple causes that we could cite as 
we all think about the issue of mass casualty events and 
extremist events, or generally. The Nation is wrestling with 
mass violence extremism and issues of responsibility, digital 
responsibility, for some of these events.
    In fact, in my home state of Indiana, Hoosiers and Crown 
Point, Indiana recently experienced firsthand how a person can 
become radicalized over the internet, something I know that 
many of your companies have studied and are working on. In 
2016, a Crown Point man was arrested and convicted for planning 
a terrorist attack after becoming radicalized by ISIS over the 
internet. Thankfully the FBI in the Indianapolis Joint 
Terrorism Task Force intervened before any violent attack 
occurred. However, that is not always the case as we know, and 
we have seen this across the country.
    And that is why it is critically important that we have 
this hearing, that we continue to work together 
collaboratively, knowing that your products and platforms 
provide incredible value to consumers and they obviously were 
not intended for this purpose. So it is our responsibility in 
Congress, it is definitely your responsibility as business 
people, to make sure that we monitor how the great value that 
you provide can be used in an illicit, improper, dangerous, and 
nefarious manner.
    In one minute or less because I have three minutes less 
left, I would request that the representatives from Google and 
Facebook and Twitter tell us why Americans should be confident 
that each of your companies are taking this issue seriously, 
and why Americans should be optimistic about your efforts going 
forward?
    The Chairman. One minute each?
    Senator Young. Yes, indeed.
    Mr. Slater. Thank you, Senator. I would start by pointing 
to YouTube community guidelines enforcement report, which 
details every quarter videos we have removed, the reasons why, 
and indeed how much is being flagged first by machines in 
dealing with this issue, removing violative content, as a 
combination of technology and people. Technology can get better 
and better at identifying patterns.
    People can help deal with the right nuances and we have 
seen over time that the technology is getting better and better 
at taking down the content faster and before people have viewed 
it. As I've said at the outset, of the 9 million videos that we 
removed in the second quarter of this year, 87 percent of those 
were first flagged by our machines, and 80 percent of those 
were removed before a single view. When we talk about violent 
extremism which it is generally better in terms of removable 
before wide viewing.
    So, you know, we are already seeing advancements in machine 
learning not just in this area but across the industry broadly, 
and the thing about machine learning is as it is fed more data, 
as it learns from mistakes, as we say, you got to learn here. 
Those systems will get better, and so why one should be 
optimistic if those systems ideally will continue to get 
better. Will they be perfect? No, bad actors will continue to 
evolve, but I do think there is room for optimism, and I think 
there is reason for optimism based on the collaboration between 
all of us today.
    Senator Young. Thank you. Facebook.
    Ms. Bickert. Thank you, Senator. The first thing I will say 
is Facebook will not work as a service if it is not a safe 
place, and this is something that we are keenly aware of every 
day. If we want people to come together to build this 
community, they have to know they are safe. And so the 
incentives are there for us to make sure we are doing our part.
    One of the things that we have on our team of more than 350 
people who are primarily dedicated in their jobs to countering 
terrorism and hate is expertise. So I lead this team, my 
background is with more than a decade as a Federal criminal 
prosecutor and safety and security are personal to me. But the 
people that I have hired onto this team have backgrounds in law 
enforcement, in academia, studying terrorism and 
radicalization. This is something that people come to work on 
at Facebook because this is what they care about. They are not 
assigned to work on it while they are at Facebook. This is 
bringing in expertise, and I want to make that very clear.
    And then finally, similar to my colleagues here, we have 
taken steps to make what we are doing very transparent. The 
reports we published in the past year and a half show a steady 
increase in our ability to detect terror, violence, and hate 
much earlier when it is uploaded to the site and before anybody 
reports it to us. Now more than 99 percent of the violent 
videos and the terrorist propaganda that we removed from the 
site we are finding ourselves before anybody reports it to us.
    Senator Young. Thank you. Twitter.
    Mr. Pickles. Thank you, Senator. I think people can be 
optimistic. A few years ago, at the peak of Islamic caliphate 
so-called, people challenged our industry to do more be better. 
I now look at a time where 90 percent of the terrorist content 
Twitter removes is detected through technology. I look at 
independent academics like Professor Morecambe who talked about 
the IS community being decimated on Twitter. I look at the 
collaboration that we have between our companies, which didn't 
exist when I first joined Twitter five and a half years ago. 
All of those areas have been driven by better technology, 
faster response, and a much more aggressive posture toward bad 
actors.
    Twitter is now showing benefit in other areas, but I think 
we can also take confidence that no one is going to tell this 
committee our work is done. And every one of us will leave here 
today knowing we have more to do and we can never sleep. These 
actors are adversarial, and we have to keep it active.
    Senator Young. Thank you so much. I could spend five days, 
five weeks, maybe five months, or five years in this. I only 
had five minutes. I am already one minute over, Mr. Chairman.
    The Chairman. Thank you. Senator Rosen, you are next. I am 
going to go vote and I can assure you I will not let them close 
that vote until you have asked your questions and get over 
there.
    Senator Rosen.

                STATEMENT OF HON. JACKY ROSEN, 
                    U.S. SENATOR FROM NEVADA

    Senator Rosen. I appreciate that, Senator. Thank you for 
holding this important hearing. I want to thank all the 
witnesses for being here to talk about this very real and 
difficult issue. The rise of extreme on extremism online is a 
serious threat and the Internet is unfortunately proven of 
valuable tool to extremists who are connecting with one another 
through various forms to spread hate and dangerous ideologies. 
While we are here to focus today on the proliferation of 
extremism online, which of course is incredibly important, we 
must not lose sight of the fact that violent individuals who 
find communities online to fuel their hatred have also acted in 
the name of hate.
    We cannot ignore the fact that the absence of sensible 
common-sense gun safety measures like background checks are 
allowing individuals to access dangerous weapons far too 
easily. And so we know the majority of Americans want us to 
support that, but I represent the great State of Nevada, and as 
we approach unfortunately the 2-year anniversary of the one 
October shooting in Las Vegas, the deadliest mass shooting in 
modern American history, we know that coordination with and 
between law enforcement is more important than ever. The 
Southern Nevada Counterterrorism Center also known as our 
Fusion Center is an example of a dynamic partnership between 27 
different law enforcement agencies to rapidly and accurately 
respond to terrorists and other threats.
    With Las Vegas hosting nearly 50 million tourists and 
visitors each year, the Fusion Center is responsible for 
preventing countless crimes and even acts of terrorism. So to 
all of you, can you please discuss with us your coordination 
efforts with law enforcement when violent or threatening 
content is identified on your platforms, and what do you need 
from us as a legislative body to promote and enable, 
facilitate, whatever word you want to use, to facilitate this 
partnership to keep our communities safe from another shooting 
like the one in October? Please.
    Ms. Bickert. Thank you, Senator. The attack was incredibly 
tragic, and our hearts are with those who have suffered and did 
suffer in that attack. Our relationship with law enforcement 
first is an ongoing effort. We have a team that does trainings 
to make sure that law enforcement understand how they can best 
work with us. And that is something that we do proactively, we 
reach out and offer those.
    Anytime there is a mass violence incident, we reach out to 
law enforcement immediately even if we are not aware of any 
connection between our service and the incident. We want to 
make sure that they know where we are and how to reach us. We 
also have an online portal through which they can submit legal 
process, including emergency requests, and we have a team that 
office is staffed 24 hours a day so that we can respond 
quickly.
    And finally, we proactively refer imminent threat of 
serious physical harm to law enforcement whenever we find them.
    Senator Rosen. Thank you.
    Mr. Pickles. Thank you, Senator, and I just wanted to echo 
firstly Monika's sympathies for your constituents who were 
victims of that horrible tragedy. The lessons I think we have 
learned since that attack have continued to inform our 
thinking, and for example, not waiting for the ideological 
intent of the shooter to be known before acting. I think one of 
the challenges we have is in the traditional terrorist space, 
we might look for an organization affiliation before we would 
say, this is a terrorist attack.
    We don't wait for that anymore. We act first to stop people 
using our services. As Monika said, we do cooperate with law 
enforcement and provide credible threats. I think one of the 
questions and I along with colleagues from other companies 
actually met with a number of agencies yesterday to discuss how 
we can further deepen our collaboration, and one of the 
questions we had there is a huge amount of information within 
the law enforcement community, within the DHS umbrella, that is 
classified that might help us understand the threats, the 
trends, the situational awareness.
    So understanding how more information can be shared with 
our industry to inform us about the threats----
    Senator Rosen. Can you provide us in writing some of the 
tools that you think you might need to help you better 
cooperate to protect our communities?
    Mr. Pickles. Absolutely, and that was the subject of the 
meeting yesterday and we had a very productive conversation.
    Senator Rosen. Thank you.
    Mr. Slater. Senator, broadly similar here, both in horror 
and sympathy. Tragedies like that one and in the ways that we 
proactively cooperate with law enforcement refer credible 
threats as well as receive valid request emergency disclosure 
request and respond to them expeditiously.
    Senator Rosen. Thank you. I see my time is up. I am going 
to submit a question for the record about combating violent 
anti-Semitism online. I know other people are waiting. We have 
votes. I appreciate your time and your commitment to solving, 
working on this issue.

                  STATEMENT OF HON. MIKE LEE, 
                     U.S. SENATOR FROM UTAH

    Senator Lee [presiding]. Thank you, Senator Rosen. Your 
questions will be submitted for the record. I want to start 
with a simple yes or no question. I don't mean this to be a 
trick yes or no question answer. It is either yes or no, or yes 
or no with a brief one sentence caveat if you need to. I would 
like to hear from each of the three of you, from Ms. Bickert, 
and then Mr. Pickles, and then Mr. Slater: Do you provide a 
platform that you regard and present to the public as neutral 
in the political sense?
    Ms. Bickert. Yes, Senator, our rules are politically 
neutral, and we apply them neutrally.
    Senator Lee. So you aspire to political neutrality as to 
left versus right?
    Ms. Bickert. We want to be a service for political ideas 
across the spectrum.
    Senator Lee. Mr. Pickles?
    Mr. Pickles. We enforce our rules impartially and our rules 
are crafted without ideology included.
    Senator Lee. Mr. Slater?
    Mr. Slater. Similarly, we craft our services without regard 
to political ideology though as we have discussed today, we are 
not neutral against terrorism or violent extremism.
    Senator Lee. Yes, and I appreciate you pointing that out 
that is of course not what I am talking about. And that leads 
into the next question I wanted to raise with each of you. I 
think it is important the work each of you are doing in this 
area is important. It is important for anyone occupying this 
space to be conscious of those things. You do a service to 
those who access your services by removing things like 
pornography, terrorism advocacy, and things like that. There is 
a lot of debate that surrounds this issue and surrounds some of 
the legal framework surrounding it.
    As you know Section 230 of the Communications Decency Act 
has received a lot of criticism. It protects a website from 
being held liable as a publisher of information by another 
information content provider. And significantly, Section 230 is 
a good Samaritan provision. It gives you the promise that you 
won't be held liable for taking down this type of objectionable 
content that we are talking about, whether it is something that 
is constitutionally protected or not. And so for each of the 
same witnesses, again, I would ask you, each of you represents 
a private company and each of you are accountable to your 
consumers within your company. This means that in some sense, 
that you have incentives to provide a safe and enjoyable 
experience on your respective platform. So I have got a 
question about Section 230.
    Does Section 230, particularly the Good Samaritan 
provisions, help you in your efforts to swiftly take down 
things like pornography and terrorist content off your 
platforms? And would it be more difficult without the legal 
certainty that Section 230 provides?
    Ms. Bickert. Absolutely, Senator. Section 230 is critical 
to our efforts in safety and security.
    Senator Lee. Mr. Pickles?
    Mr. Pickles. Absolutely. I would go further and say that 
Section 230 has been critical to the leadership of American 
industry in the information technology sector.
    Senator Lee. Mr. Slater?
    Mr. Slater. Absolutely. Yes.
    Senator Lee. On a related point, imagine a world where this 
is suddenly taken away, where those provisions no longer exist. 
Large companies like yours might be able to--I strongly suspect 
still would be able to and still probably would filter out this 
content between the artificial intelligence capabilities at 
your disposal and the human resources that you have.
    I suspect you could and probably would still do your best 
to perform the same function. What about a startup, what about 
a company trying to enter into the space that each of your 
companies entered into when they were created not very many 
years ago? What would happen to them? Ms. Bickert?
    Ms. Bickert. Senator, thank you for that question. This 
reminds me of industry conversations involving smaller 
companies back before we formed the Global Internet Forum to 
Counter Terrorism in June 2017. We were having closed door 
sessions with companies, large and small, to talk about the 
best ways to combat the threat of terrorism online, and the 
smaller companies were very concerned about liability. Section 
230 is very important for them to be able to begin to 
proactively act and assess content.
    Mr. Pickles. I would say it is a fundamental part of 
maintaining a competitive online ecosystem. And without it, the 
ecosystem is less competitive.
    Senator Lee. Mr. Slater?
    Mr. Slater. Yes, and I just add, the U.S. has Section 230 
and that is part of the reason why we have been a leader in 
economic growth and innovation and technological development. 
Other countries that don't have something like it suffer, and 
study after study has shown that. And we will be happy to 
discuss that more.
    Senator Lee. If it were to be taken away--so all three of 
your companies, in particular Mr. Slater, not exactly known for 
being a small business or a business with a modest economic 
impact, but you can identify, I assume, with this concern I am 
expressing if we were to take that away Google might be able to 
keep up with what it needs to do, but wouldn't it be harder for 
someone to start say a new search engine company, a new tech 
platform of one sort or another, as somebody starting out in 
the same position where your company was a couple of decades 
ago. Wouldn't that be exponentially more difficult?
    Mr. Slater. I think it would create problems for innovators 
of all stripes, but certainly small, medium sized businesses 
would have a lot of trouble potentially getting their arms 
around that sort of significant change to the fundamental legal 
framework of the internet.
    Senator Lee. Thank you. My time has expired.
    Senator Baldwin.

               STATEMENT OF HON. TAMMY BALDWIN, 
                  U.S. SENATOR FROM WISCONSIN

    Senator Baldwin. Thank you. I wanted to begin by thanking 
our full committee Chairman Wicker for holding this hearing. I 
think it is a vital conversation for us to be having. We need 
to be taking a hard look at how we address the rising tide of 
online extremism and its real world consequences in our 
country. I do have some questions for you on this important 
topic, but first I wanted to echo some of what my colleagues 
have already said, which is there is much more that the Senate 
must do to address gun violence, whether or not it is connected 
to hatred espoused on the internet.
    So more than 200 days ago, the House of Representatives 
passed a bipartisan universal background check bill and this 
common-sense gun safety measure has an extraordinary level of 
public support. It deserves a vote on the Senate floor, and I 
feel like we can't simply have hearings, but we have to act to 
reduce gun violence. Mr. Selim, ADL Center on Extremism has 
closely studied hate crimes and extremist violence in this 
country. Is it fair to say that there has been an alarming 
increase in bias-motivated crimes including extremist killings 
in the last several years?
    Mr. Selim. Yes, Senator, that is accurate.
    Senator Baldwin. In the case of extremist killings, what 
role do you feel that access to firearms has played in that 
increase?
    Mr. Selim. Senator, thank you for that question. As I 
briefly alluded to earlier just to expand on what I was 
mentioning, according to our recent ADL report, extremists of 
all ideological spectrums that committed murders or homicides 
in the United States, 73 percent of those acts were committed 
with firearms.
    Senator Baldwin. Thank you. What impact do you believe this 
increase in hate crimes, including extremist killings, have on 
the minority communities whose members have been the targets of 
these attacks, and let me just add to that question. One of the 
unique aspects of a hate crime is that it now not only 
victimizes the targeted victim, but it strikes fear among those 
who share the same characteristics with the victim or victims.
    Mr. Selim. Senator, thank you for making this point. In the 
past 24 months, we saw a calendar year 2017 with a 57 percent 
increase of anti-Semitic incidents across the country. The FBI 
and DOJ's own hate crime data showed a 17 percent increase in 
hate crimes and bias-motivated crimes in calendar 2017. We 
continue to see these troubling statistics year after year and 
so it is imperative, and part of my testimony today, both the 
submitted written and my oral testimony, speaks to the need for 
greater enhancement and enforcement of hate crime laws and 
protections for victims.
    Senator Baldwin. I am an original co-sponsor of Senator Bob 
Casey's legislation to disarm hate crime, hate act, which would 
bar those convicted of misdemeanor hate crimes from obtaining 
firearms. Do you agree that this measure could help keep guns 
out of the hands of individuals who might engage in extremist 
violence?
    Mr. Selim. Yes, Senator. Thank you for your leadership and 
all members who have supported this legislation. ADL supports 
this legislation.
    Senator Baldwin. Thank you. I appreciate the efforts that 
our witnesses from the social media companies have described 
regarding their company's efforts to combat online extremism, 
including to provide some transparency to their users and the 
general public. It is of course critically important to 
understand how you are addressing problems within your existing 
services and platforms. I would actually like to learn more 
from you about how you are thinking about this issue as you 
develop and introduce new products.
    In other words, I think a lot of us feel that the approach 
of rapidly introducing a new product and then assessing the 
consequences later is a problem. So I would like to ask you how 
do you plan to build combating extremism into the next 
generation of ways in which individuals engage online, and why 
don't we start with you Ms. Bickert?
    Ms. Bickert. Thank you for the question, Senator. Safety by 
design is an important part to building new products at our 
company. One of the things we have built in the past maybe 5 
years is a new products policy team that is under me. Their 
responsibility is to make sure they are aware of new products 
and features that are being built and explaining to these 
engineers who are thinking of all the wonderful ways that the 
service could be used, all of the abuse scenarios that we could 
also envision and making sure that we have reporting mechanisms 
or other safety features in place.
    Mr. Pickles. I think as I said earlier, we are in a very 
adversarial space. We know that bad actors will change the 
behavior. And so every time we have a feature, a policy 
decision, one of the key processes in that part of the 
discussion is how can this be used against us? How can this be 
gamed? How will people change their behavior to try and 
circumvent the policy? And you are absolutely right. We need to 
take that learning and share it with smaller companies. Certain 
the work that FCT has done, working with more than I think 200 
small companies around the world to share that knowledge with 
them, to help them understand the challenges, is also 
invaluable.
    Mr. Slater. Similarly, our trust and safety teams are at 
the table with product managers and engineers from the 
conception of an idea all the way through the development and 
possible release. So from ground up, it is safety by design.
    Senator Baldwin. Thank you.

                STATEMENT OF HON. DAN SULLIVAN, 
                    U.S. SENATOR FROM ALASKA

    Senator Sullivan [presiding]. So I want to thank the 
witnesses, and I am going to be taking over as the Chair, and I 
will call on myself as the next witness. I want to actually ask 
all of you, you know, your companies, your technology, you are 
famous for its algorithms, which seemed to have the ability to 
pinpoint on what people want. You know, you can put an e-mail 
out or even some people think, talk about say your interest in 
yellow sweaters, and next thing you know, you have ads popping 
up on your Facebook or other accounts that talk about yellow 
sweaters. Who knows how that happens but to a lot of us it has. 
It is pretty impressive.
    But here is my question. If your algorithm technology is so 
good at, kind of, pinpointing things like that, what people are 
interested in, particularly as it relates to ads, what are the 
challenges with regard to directing that kind of technology to 
help us and help you find what is being talked about here on 
both sides of the aisle which is the people who are committing 
this kind of violence are typically disaffected young males, 
and aren't there signs, aren't there things that you can do 
with the technology that you do so well in other spaces to at 
least provide more warning signs of this kind of violence from 
these kind of individuals who in some ways already have a 
profile online? Throw that out to any of you. And are you 
working on that?
    Ms. Bickert. Thank you for the question, Senator. 
Technology plays a huge role in what we are doing to enforce 
our safety policies at Facebook. In the area of terrorism to 
extremism, and violence, it is not just the matching software 
that we have to stop things like organized terror propaganda 
videos.
    We are now using artificial intelligence machine learning 
to get better at identifying new content that we have not seen 
before that might be promoting violence or trying to incite 
violence or engage in other harmful behavior. Anytime that we 
find a credible threat of imminent physical harm, we 
proactively send that out to law enforcement. And these systems 
are getting better every day.
    Senator Sullivan. And are you using algorithms and the 
advanced technologies that you use in other spaces to help 
identify those threats?
    Ms. Bickert. There are certainly cross learnings across the 
company. There are different products that work in different 
ways, but----
    Senator Sullivan. But is it a priority of yours, the way it 
would be for selling yellow sweaters?
    Ms. Bickert. Oh, absolutely. And this is something that we 
do----
    Senator Sullivan. Can I ask that of all the companies here?
    Mr. Pickles. Absolutely, investing in technology to find 
content that is terrorist content, violent extremist content, 
is absolutely a priority.
    Mr. Slater. It is a top priority. Yes.
    Mr. Selim. Senator, I would only add to this part of the 
conversation as someone who studied the research in the data 
around these issues for nearly two decades, the threat 
environment that we are in today has changed significantly. 
White supremacist terrorists in the United States do not have 
training camps in the same way that foreign terrorist groups do 
like Al-Qaeda or Isis. Their training camp where they connect, 
learn, and coordinate with one another is in the online space.
    So it is imperative that the question you are asking about 
the machine learning, the technology, the artificial 
intelligence continue to advance to disrupt that environment 
and make it an inhospitable place for individuals that want to 
promote violent content of any ideological spectrum to be 
disrupted.
    Senator Sullivan. Let me ask another question. This is kind 
of a bigger kind of policy question, but you all of your 
companies kind of have this tension between you want eyeballs, 
on right, you want more clicks, you want more time on, and 
yet--with Facebook or Google or Twitter, and yet there I think 
there is increasing studies that are showing for example the 
amount of young men and women, young girls, who feel kind of a 
sense of loneliness from their time online.
    You know, there is indications that among teenagers, the 
suicide rates are increasing particularly for young girls. One 
of the things that I worry about, you know, we are all dealing 
with this opioid epidemic right now and we are looking back 
going, my God, how did we how did we do that? How did we get to 
this position in the 90s and the policies, and other things 
that you know, 72,000 Americans died of overdoses last year.
    And so we are, kind of, looking backward saying, how did 
this happen? Do you, in your kind of c-suites of policymaking, 
do you ever wonder why we can be looking back in 20 years 
going, how in the hell did we addict a bunch of young Americans 
to look at their damn iPhones 8 hours a day and 20 years from 
now we are going to be seeing the social and physical and 
psychological ramifications where we all might be kicking 
ourselves in the head saying, why did we allow that to happen?
    Do you guys ever think about that? Because I think about 
that and it worries me, but you have tension because you want--
don't you want more Facetime, don't you want young teenagers 
spending 7 hours a day staring at their iPhones because that 
helps your revenues? Do you worry that 15, 20 years from now, 
we are going to be in the same spot that we are with opioids 
and saying, what did we do to our kids? What did we do to our 
citizens? Do any of you guys worry about that? Your power, your 
negative implications of what is happening in society right 
now.
    Ms. Bickert. Senator, thank you for the question. As a 
mother, I take these questions about wellness very seriously 
and our company does as well. And this is something that we 
look at and we talk to youth wellness groups to make sure that 
we are crafting products and policies that are in the best 
long-term interests of the people who want to come and connect 
through Facebook.
    I also want to say that we have seen social media be a 
tremendous place for support for those who are thinking of 
harming themselves or struggling with eating disorders or 
opioid addiction or getting exposed to hateful content. And so 
we are also exploring and developing ways of linking people up 
with helpful resources. We already do that now for opioid 
addiction, for thoughts of self-harm, for people who are asking 
or searching for hateful content. We now provide them with help 
resources. We do think that this can be a really positive thing 
for overall wellness.
    Mr. Pickles. I just thought we have similar programs in 
place for both opioids searches and also for people who are 
using terms referencing self-harm or suicide where we will 
provide, intervene and provide them with a source of support. 
And that is something we have rolled out around the world. I 
think the other thing is we certainly recognize that things 
like digital literacy are issues that we as industry and 
certainly we as Twitter need to invest in to make sure that as 
people using our services, they also have the skills and the 
awareness to use them discerningly.
    And then finally, our CEO is committed to the company, to 
looking at the health of the conversation, and not just using 
the kind of metrics that you have referenced but looking at 
much more broader metrics that measure the health of the 
conversation rather than just revenue.
    Senator Sullivan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    The Chairman [presiding]. Thank you, Senator Sullivan.
    Senator Cruz.

                  STATEMENT OF HON. TED CRUZ, 
                    U.S. SENATOR FROM TEXAS

    Senator Cruz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I will say thank 
you to my friend from Alaska for sharing apparently this deep 
void and longing in your heart. And I just want to reassure you 
for Christmas, you will be getting that yellow sweater.
    [Laughter.]
    Senator Cruz. Mr. Slater, I want to start with you. I want 
to talk a little bit about Project Dragonfly. In August 2018 it 
was reported that Google was developing a censored search 
engine under the alias of Project Dragonfly. In response to 
those concerns, Alphabet shareholders requested that the 
company publish a human rights impact assessment by October 30 
of this year examining the actual and potential impacts of 
censored Google search in China.
    However, during Alphabet shareholder meeting on June 19, 
the proposal for the assessment was rejected. In fact 
Alphabet's Board of Directors explicitly encouraged 
shareholders to vote against the proposal and Alphabet 
commented that ``Google has been open about its desire to 
increase its ability to serve users in China and other 
countries.
    We have considered a variety of options for how to offer 
services in China in a way that is consistent with our mission 
and have gradually expanded our offerings to consumers in 
China.'' So I want to start with just some clarity. Mr. Slater, 
has Google ceased any and all development and work on Project 
Dragonfly?
    Mr. Slater. Senator, to my knowledge, yes.
    Senator Cruz. And has Google committed to foregoing future 
projects that may be named differently, but would be focused on 
developing a censored search engine in China?
    Mr. Slater. Senator, we have nothing to announce at this 
time. And I think whatever we would do, we would look very 
carefully at things like human rights. In fact, we work with 
the Global Network Initiative on an ongoing basis to evaluate 
how our principles, our practices, our products comport with 
human rights in the law.
    Senator Cruz. So, roughly contemporaneously, Google decided 
that it didn't want to work with the U.S. Department of 
Defense. How does Google justify having been willing to work 
with the Chinese government on complex projects including 
artificial intelligence under Project Maven and at the same 
time not being willing to help the Department of Defense 
develop ways to minimize civilian casualties through better AI? 
How do you how do you reconcile those two approaches?
    Mr. Slater. Senator, as we have talked about today, we do 
partner with law enforcement and we do partner with the 
military in certain ways offering some of our services. Also as 
a business, we draw responsible lines about where we want to be 
in business, including limitations on and getting in the field 
of building weapons and so on, and you know, we will continue 
to evaluate that over time.
    Senator Cruz. Let me shift to a different topic which is 
this panelists talked about combating extremism and the efforts 
of social media to do that. Many Americans, including myself, 
have a long-standing concern that when big tech says it is 
combating extremism that that is often a shield for advancing 
political censorship. Mr. Pickles, I want to talk about 
recently Twitter extended its pattern of censorship to the 
level that it took down the Twitter account of the Senate 
Majority Leader Mitch McConnell.
    That I found a pretty remarkable thing for Twitter to do, 
and it did so because that account, as I understand it, had 
sent out a video of angry protesters outside of Senator 
McConnell's house, including an organizer of Black Lives Matter 
in Louisville, who is heard in the video saying that the Senate 
Majority Leader ``should have broken his little raggedy 
wrinkled ass neck,'' and someone else who had a voodoo doll of 
the Majority Leader and another angry protester said, ``just 
stab the mf's heart,'' although that person did not abbreviate 
mf. Senate Majority Leader sent out those threats of violence 
and found rather remarkably his own Twitter account taken down. 
How does Twitter explain that?
    Mr. Pickles. Well, thank you Senator for the opportunity to 
discuss this. Something we have been asked around the world is 
the climate in many political jurisdictions of safety of people 
who hold public office. And so when we saw a video posted by 
numerous users that clearly identified someone's home and 
clearly contained as you so referenced some quite severe 
threats out of an abundance of caution, we did remove that 
video. We didn't remove the accounts. We moved that single 
tweet that contained the video from everybody who had posted it 
because the essence of a video with someone's personal home 
where the Senate Majority Leader may have been residing at the 
time with several violent references, we felt was something out 
of an abundance of caution we should remove. We then discussed 
this further with the Leader's office. We understood their 
intent was to call attention to those very threats of violence.
    And so we did permit the video to be put on Twitter with a 
warning message saying this is sensitive media, but it is that 
balance that we are striking between--I have been in many 
different situations where I have been asked the exact opposite 
which is similar content should be removed because it contains 
a clear violent threat, and that balance is something that we 
strive to get right every day. But our first thought in that 
instance was the safety of Leader McConnell and his family.
    Senator Cruz. You would agree there is a difference between 
someone posting video where they are threatening someone else 
and the target of that threat posting the video. Do you agree 
that those are qualitatively different?
    Mr. Pickles. I think that is holy fair, but I think in the 
situation where you have the person's home visible in the 
video, there is still a risk there and we are motivated by 
preventing that offline harm that could have occurred because 
the home was visible. It was a hardcore and we appreciate the 
Leader's discussion and discussing with his campaign team and 
his Senate office, and we appreciate their insight. But this 
was something that our motivation was to prevent harm, not the 
kind of potentially ideological issues you may allude to.
    Senator Cruz. Thank you.
    The Chairman. But Mr. Pickles, have you rethought your 
policy since the instance that Senator Cruz asked about? And I 
would call your attention to Ms. Bickert's testimony, written 
testimonial, on page 2 which says, and I quote, ``we do not 
allow propaganda or symbols that represent any of these 
organizations or individuals to be shared on a platform unless 
they are being used to condemn or inform.'' Is that language 
instructive to your platform and don't you think that clearly 
it was readily evident from the beginning that Senator 
McConnell and his campaign had posted that video to condemn and 
inform?
    Mr. Pickles. I think this is an absolutely relevant issue. 
We as a company have taken a more aggressive posture after the 
Christchurch attack. We did see people posting both excerpts of 
the manifesto and content of the video to condemn it, and we 
decided even in those circumstances we would remove it. And for 
other attacks more recently in the United States where images 
have been posted to other manifestos with large chunks of the 
manifestos even where they are condemning it, we have taken the 
decision to remove that material.
    So this is something that is constantly under tension and I 
think the case you illustrate highlights for us, the complexity 
in getting this right. But again if we are going to err on the 
side of caution, fewer violent threats and fewer people's homes 
being visible on our platform is notably a good thing. We have 
to work harder at taking into account the kind of context you 
outline, but this is something where this is the first time--I 
have been with the company five and a half years, I have never 
been asked why didn't we leave something up that contains a 
violent threat, and so I think that in itself is illustrative 
of the complexity of the situation.
    The Chairman. Well in terms of the context in this instance 
it was the owner of the home who chose to inform the world 
about what was being said against him, and it was the 
individual himself who posted this. And it seems to be a clear 
cut case in that instance that differentiates it from the 
condemnation of the larger incident of the Christchurch 
violence. I would just suggest that it shouldn't have taken 
very long for Twitter to understand that. Senator Sullivan, you 
are recognized.
    Senator Sullivan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just have a 
couple of follow-up questions. Mr. Slater, one of Senator 
Cruz's questions. You know, I think it is--whether a company 
wants to work with the Pentagon I think is something that 
leadership of the company, individual companies have to make 
that decision. I think that is certainly something that is 
fine.
    I think what troubles a number of us is that where there is 
a declaration that you are not willing to work with the 
Department of Defense on certain issues and yet there is a 
willingness to work with one of our country's potential 
adversaries, particularly on sensitive technological issues 
that are important to the competition between the two nations.
    Do you understand why that has caused bipartisan concern 
here? And how should we address it? Should Congress take action 
on those kinds of situations? Not saying everybody has to work 
for the Pentagon, that is your decision. But if you don't want 
to work to help with our Nation's defense, but you are working 
with the country that poses a very significant threat long-term 
to the United States, do you understand why that causes concern 
here?
    Mr. Slater. Senator, I do appreciate the concern. We are 
proudly an American company. We are a business that wants to 
draw a responsible lines and we look forward to continue to 
engage with you, the Committee, and others to make sure we are 
doing that.
    Senator Sullivan. Do you think if there are instances of 
that, a clear-cut example of, hey, we are not going to do 
anything on the Nation's defense with the U.S. Department of 
Defense, but we are going to work with the Chinese, something 
very clear and obvious. Do you think there is something that we 
should do to prevent that or penalize that? We the Congress?
    Mr. Slater. I think it is an important question. I think as 
a business we try and strike responsible and consistent lines, 
but the details would certainly have to matter.
    Senator Sullivan. OK. Mr. Pickles let me ask just a one 
final question. It is really a follow up to Senator Scott's 
earlier question. You said that the Twitter account of Maduro 
in Venezuela has not ``broken any of the rules.'' What are 
those rules? And at what point would you look to have somebody 
who is certainly not treating his citizens well? And Senator 
Scott has been a leader on this issue, but, you know, what are 
those rules and at what point would you look at what they are 
doing in their own citizen as a way to maybe not provide them 
the platform that you have?
    Mr. Pickles. Thank you. Well firstly the rules apply to any 
user on Twitter at the same. I can make a make a full copy 
available and it will be, for example, whether it is 
encouragement of violence. If the Twitter account was used in 
some of the ways that we have seen around the world to 
encourage violence against minorities, to organize violence, we 
would take action on those accounts breaking those rules.
    Senator Sullivan. Would Twitter allow Putin to have an 
account or Xi Jinping to have an account?
    Mr. Pickles. If they were acting within our rules, the one 
thing I would note is, and this is slightly different but 
important, some worldly, some governments have sought to 
manipulate our platform to spread propaganda information 
through breaking our rules. One of those governments is 
Venezuela, and we have made a public declaration of every 
account that we removed from Twitter for engaging in 
information operations covertly that we believe is responsible 
for that government.
    We made that whole archive available to the public and to 
researchers. We have taken this same step with information 
operations that have been directed we believe from countries 
including China, Iran, and Russia because we believe that it is 
not just those single Twitter accounts, that some governments 
do also seek to manipulate our platform. And where they do so, 
we will take action to remove that manipulation and make it 
public so people can learn----
    Senator Sullivan. So if the government takes violence 
against its own citizens, is that breaking the Twitter rules?
    Mr. Pickles. What I think of that act is activities 
happening offline, and the key question for us is, what is 
happening on Twitter?
    Senator Sullivan. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Sullivan. And thank you to 
our witnesses. The hearing record will remain open for two 
weeks. During this time, Senators are asked to submit any 
questions for the record. Upon receipt, the witnesses are 
requested to submit their complete written answers to the 
Committee as soon as possible but no later than Wednesday, 
October 2, 2019 by close of business.
    I thank each and every one of you for appearing today. This 
hearing is now adjourned.
    [Whereupon, at 12:08 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]


                            A P P E N D I X

                                                  16 September 2019
To: Chairman Roger Wicker,
Ranking Member Maria Cantwell,
U.S. Senate Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, DC.

Fr: Gretchen Peters and Professor Amr al-Azm
The Alliance to Counter Crime Online

Re: Concerns Facebook Platforms Facilitate Terror, Spread Crime

Dear Chairman Wicker and Ranking Member Cantwell,

    As the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation 
prepares to question Facebook's Head of Global Policy Management, we 
want to express our grave concern that Facebook's platforms are 
infested by criminal syndicates and terror groups. Facebook has been 
grossly negligent both in monitoring and removing this toxic content. 
Moreover, one of our members has performed research indicating the firm 
has knowingly deceived lawmakers, investors and the public about the 
extent to which the firm is able to remove extremist content.
    We want the committee to understand that the world's largest social 
media company does more than just connect people. The public should not 
trust Facebook's claim that they have been successful in removing 99 
percent of ISIS content because it is only a talking point that they 
have never been forced to prove. Our research indicates Facebook and 
its family of platforms are also used by terrorist groups as a 
megaphone for propaganda, for recruiting new members, and even to 
fundraise. Just this week, ACCO is preparing to release a report that 
documents extensive fund-raising activities by designated terror groups 
such as Lebanese Hezbollah.
    ACCO members also include a group of brave Syrian archeologists 
investigating the illicit antiquities trade on Facebook. They have 
recorded closed groups where almost 2 million regular users log on to 
trade tens of thousands of artifacts trafficked from conflict regions 
including Syria, Iraq and Yemen--a war crime. Many of the sellers 
openly declare they are donating proceeds of these sales to ISIS.
    The Facebook family of apps are ground zero for organized crime 
syndicates to connect with buyers, market their illegal goods, and move 
money, using the same ease of connectivity enjoyed by ordinary users. 
Instead of acknowledging his technology is being used for illegal 
purposes and fixing the problem, Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg clings to 
immunities provided by Section 230 of the Communications Decency Act of 
1996, which courts have interpreted to mean that tech firms shouldn't 
be held liable for content posted by third-parties.
    There is a huge problem with this approach. The algorithms Facebook 
has touted to connect the world have connected criminals and terrorists 
faster than Facebook's own beleaguered moderators can delete them. The 
impact of this illegal activity is affecting our communities, our 
cultures, and our environment, and it's happening in the same digital 
spaces where our children play, our families connect, and our companies 
advertise.
    In light of all this, Zuckerberg's announcement that he plans to 
alter Facebook to focus on groups--and also launch a cryptocurrency--
are downright alarming. Groups are already the epicenter for illicit 
activity on Facebook. Do we want Facebook to become an even safer place 
for terrorists and criminals?
    There's no reason to believe Facebook's proposed changes will make 
user data any more secure. After all, Facebook hasn't changed its 
fundamental business model. But the changes will make it harder for 
authorities and civil society groups to track and counter illegal 
activity on the platform.
    The firm's continued negligence in the moderation of criminal and 
terror content makes clear that the time for self-regulation has 
passed.
    The challenge is that Federal laws take time, something that human 
trafficking victims, drug addicts and endangered species don't have. 
But there are other ways U.S. regulators can address crime on social 
media. Facebook's IPO may hold the key to effective regulation.
    When Facebook went public in 2012, the firm voluntarily entered 
into a strict regulatory regime that negates CDA 230 immunities in the 
context of Facebook's obligations under securities law. The firm's lack 
of internal controls and effective compliance programs implicate 
potentially serious securities law violations. Your committee can 
influence immediate action by asking the Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC) to utilize its existing regulatory power.
    As a result of Facebook's failure to establish appropriate internal 
controls, criminal activity has accelerated on its platform and 
continues to grow. Now is not the time to let Facebook launch a 
cryptocurrency. It's time to make social media a safer space for all.
            Respectfully,

Gretchen Peters, Executive Director
Alliance to Counter Crime Online
Dr. Amr AI-Azm, Co-founder of ACCO
Director of ATHAR Project
                                 ______
                                 
                                 [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
                                 

                                 
                                 ______
                                 
 Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Shelley Moore Capito 
                           to Monika Bickert
    Question 1. You mentioned in your testimony the importance of 
counter speech to prevent people from becoming radicalized. 
Radicalization comes in many forms and threatens the core values our 
Nation was created upon. Are there different strategies and best 
practices in combating domestic vs foreign extremism?
    Answer. Terrorists, terrorist content, and hate speech in all 
forms--including white supremacy and domestic terrorist content--have 
no place on Facebook. We prohibit content that incites violence, and we 
remove terrorists and posts that support terrorism whenever we become 
aware of them. We use a variety of tools in this fight against 
terrorism and violent extremism, including artificial intelligence, 
specialized human review, industry cooperation, and counterspeech 
training.
    Our definition of terrorism is agnostic to the ideology or 
political goals of a group, which means it includes everything from 
religious extremists and violent separatists to white supremacists and 
militant environmental groups. It is about whether they use violence or 
attempt to use violence to pursue those goals. And we recently updated 
our definition in consultation with experts in counterterrorism, 
international humanitarian law, freedom of speech, human rights, and 
law enforcement. The updated definition still focuses on the behavior, 
not ideology, of groups. But while our previous definition focused on 
acts of violence intended to achieve a political or ideological aim, 
our new definition more clearly encompasses attempts at violence, 
particularly when directed toward civilians.
    In addition to combating foreign terrorism, we are committed to 
identifying and rooting out domestic hate organizations. We define hate 
organizations as ``any association of three or more people that is 
organized under a name, sign, or symbol and that has an ideology, 
statements, or physical actions that attack individuals based on 
characteristics, including race, religious affiliation, nationality, 
ethnicity, gender, sex, sexual orientation, and serious disease or 
disability.'' In evaluating groups and individuals for designation as 
hateful, we have an extensive process that takes into account a number 
of different signals, and we regularly engage with academics and 
organizations to refine this process.
    While we work 24/7 to identify, review, and remove terrorist and 
violent extremist content, our efforts do not stop there. We have also 
started connecting people who search for terms associated with white 
supremacy and hate-based organizations to resources focused on helping 
people leave behind hate groups. For example, people searching for 
these terms in the U.S. will be directed to Life After Hate (https://
www.lifeafterhate.org/), an organization founded by former violent 
extremists that provides crisis intervention, education, support 
groups, and outreach. We have also recently expanded this initiative to 
Australia and Indonesia, where we work with organizations with local 
expertise on how best to counter hate in their communities. For more 
information, see https://newsroom.fb.com/news/2019/03/standing-against-
hate.
    People use our platform to speak out against hatred and extremism. 
They counter hateful content by responding to it directly, raising 
awareness on important issues, and supporting positive and moderate 
voices. We believe these efforts to resist and stand up to racism, 
violence, extremism, and hate are essential. That is why we work 
closely with local communities, experts 17 in civil society and 
academia, and policymakers to support counterspeech initiatives across 
the globe. More information can be found at https://
counterspeech.fb.com/en.

    Question 2. This Committee has held a number of hearings on the 
rise and importance of artificial intelligence (AI) in today's digital 
economy. AI has been invaluable in collecting and sorting massive 
amounts of data. In the case of today's hearing, AI has become critical 
in order to identify radicalization and terrorist threats. Each company 
has identified key tools each company uses in identifying bad actors on 
your platforms, but machine learning being one of the most critical. 
What factors are given priority when determining radicalized or 
terrorist content?
    a. You also mention the importance of human expertise in 
determining more nuanced cases. When does human expertise step in after 
AI has identified or flags content?

    b. After content has been flagged for law enforcement involvement, 
what is the process that takes place afterward? Does that content get 
sent to the FBI and then disseminated to state law enforcement?
    Answer. We use a sophisticated machine learning tool to assess 
Facebook posts that may signal support for terrorist organizations. The 
tool produces a score indicating how likely it is that the post 
violates our policies. In some cases, we will automatically remove 
posts when the tool indicates with very high confidence that the post 
contains support for terrorism. But in most cases, we still rely on 
specialized reviewers to evaluate posts, and we use these scores to 
prioritize which posts our reviewers assess first.
    We are careful not to reveal too much about our automated 
enforcement techniques, including the specific factors our machine 
learning prioritizes when evaluating content, because of adversarial 
shifts by terrorists. But we are seeing real gains as a result of this 
work: we've removed more than 26 million pieces of content related to 
global terrorist groups like ISIS and al-Qaeda in the last two years, 
99 percent of which we proactively identified and removed before anyone 
reported it to us.
    We reach out to law enforcement whenever we see a credible threat 
of imminent harm. We contact federal, state, or local law enforcement 
depending on the specific circumstances of a threat.
    We have a long history of working successfully with the Department 
of Justice, the FBI, state and local law enforcement, and other 
government agencies to address a wide variety of threats to our 
platform, including terrorist threats. We have been able to provide 
support to authorities around the world that are responding to the 
threat of terrorism, including in cases where law enforcement has been 
able to disrupt attacks and prevent harm. We have strict processes in 
place to handle government requests we receive, and we disclose account 
records in accordance with our terms of service and applicable law. We 
also have law enforcement response teams available around the clock to 
respond to emergency requests.
                                 ______
                                 
   Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Amy Klobuchar to 
                             Monika Bickert
    Online transparency and accountability is a top priority for me. In 
April, I sent a letter urging the Department of Homeland Security and 
Federal Bureau of Investigation to create a joint task force to combat 
election interference and the spread of misinformation, and this week I 
introduced legislation to create a Center at the Office of the Director 
of National Intelligence to coordinate the existing efforts of agencies 
and departments in combating foreign influence campaigns.

    Question 1. Can you speak to the importance of joint efforts by 
agencies, the intelligence community, tech companies, and elections 
officials in combating the spread of misinformation?
    Answer. We work closely with law enforcement, regulators, election 
officials, other technology companies, researchers, academics, and 
civil society groups to strengthen our platform against election 
interference and the spread of misinformation. This coordination is 
incredibly important--we can't do this alone, and we have worked to 
strengthen our relationships with government, outside experts, and 
other technology companies in order to share information and bolster 
our security efforts.
    Our partnerships, as well as our own investigations, help us find 
and remove bad actors from Facebook. For example, ahead of the U.S. 
midterm elections on October 26, 2018, we took down 82 Pages, Groups, 
and accounts linked to Iran. And in the 48 hours ahead of the 
elections, we also got a tip from the FBI which allowed us to move 
quickly to take down a coordinated effort by foreign entities on 
Facebook and Instagram. Based on this tip, we quickly identified a set 
of accounts that appeared to be engaged in coordinated inauthentic 
behavior, which is banned on Facebook because we want people to be able 
to trust the connections they make on our services. So we immediately 
blocked these accounts and publicly announced what we found and the 
action we were taking. We also shared that information with the 
government and other companies to help them with their own 
investigations.
    We're continuing to work closely with the FBI, the Department of 
Homeland Security (DHS), and other companies on ways to protect 
elections from interference on our platform. In September, security 
teams from Facebook and a number of technology companies met at 
Facebook with representatives from the FBI, the Office of the Director 
of National Intelligence (DNI), and DHS to further strengthen strategic 
collaboration regarding the security of the 2020 U.S. state, federal, 
and presidential elections.
    We're constantly following up on thousands of leads of potential 
bad activity globally, including information shared with us by law 
enforcement, industry partners, and civil society groups, and insights 
from past takedowns. Over the past two years, we've seen that threats 
are rarely confined to a single platform or tech company. That's why 
we're working closely with our fellow tech companies to deal with the 
threats we have all seen during and beyond elections. A number of 
takedowns we have conducted and announced were in close collaboration 
with other tech platforms, security companies, and law enforcement. We 
also partner with the Atlantic Council's Digital Forensic Research Lab, 
Graphika, and other researchers and experts who provide additional 
analysis of the coordinated inauthentic behavior we identify, remove, 
and publicly share, including their behavior off-platform, across 
different Internet services.

    Question 2. How could these efforts be improved?
    Answer. Our partnerships have been immensely helpful, but it can be 
challenging to coordinate the operations and timing of these 
investigations. Timing is a key to our success, and the more entities 
involved, the harder it inevitably is to get everyone synced 
seamlessly. That's why it is so important to have open lines of 
communication with all of these partners so we can ensure we are all 
aligned, and that we take action pursuant to a timeline that best 
disrupts the adversary.
    The current state of the law also does not make it easy to share 
information with other entities, which can hamper our partnerships in 
these areas. Clear authorities or liability protections that allow for 
sharing between companies and organizations would be helpful to reduce 
this friction.
    Security is never finished, and it will take our continuous efforts 
to stay one step ahead of bad actors seeking to disrupt our elections. 
The better we can be at working together, the better we will do by our 
community.

    In April, reports highlighted that the records of more than 540 
million Facebook users were publicly exposed on Amazon's cloud service. 
One provision in the privacy legislation that I lead with Senator 
Kennedy requires that U.S. consumers are notified of breaches within 72 
hours.
    Question 3. What are your views on a Federal requirement to ensure 
that consumers are informed in a timely manner when their personal 
information has been compromised?
    Facebook is committed to continuing to comply with breach 
notification laws. In some cases, we have gone beyond our legal 
obligation to notify consumers about instances where their personal 
information has been compromised, even when the law did not require us 
to do so.
    At present, there are data breach laws in 50 states, with differing 
notification thresholds and time frames. We support a Federal data 
breach notification law that would create a consistent nationwide 
standard for breach notifications. To avoid notification fatigue and 
ensure consumer attention, legislation should establish clear rules 
that require notification of the breaches most likely to harm people. 
Organizations should notify people when there has been a breach 
affecting their personal information that could cause them a risk of 
significant harm (for example, identity theft, fraud, real-time 
location-tracking, or economic loss). Breaches of information that is 
encrypted, anonymized, or otherwise de-identified do not pose a risk of 
significant harm and would not require notification, unless the 
encryption key is also breached or information that would allow the 
breached information to be re-identified is also breached. Legislation 
should set forth factors that inform whether a data breach presents a 
risk of significant harm, such that notification to consumers should be 
required.
                                 ______
                                 
 Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Richard Blumenthal to 
                             Monika Bickert
NO HATE Act and Reporting
    I have introduced legislation, the Jabara-Heyer NO HATE Act, which 
would help states implement and train officers in the National 
Incident-Based Reporting Systems. The NO HATE Act would also provide 
grants to states to better address hate crimes by training law 
enforcement, establish specialized units, create community relations 
programs, and run hate crime hotlines.

    Question 1. Do you support the Jabara-Heyer NO HATE Act?
    Answer. Hate has no place on Facebook, and we have strong 
relationships with law enforcement, academics, and experts to help us 
fight hate speech and hate-related violence on our platform. For 
example, we're partnering with Life After Hate, an organization founded 
by former violent extremists, to connect people who search for terms 
associated with white supremacy to resources focused on helping people 
leave behind hate groups. We also provide training to governments on 
how best to flag violating content, and we have portals for law 
enforcement to legally request data in ongoing and crisis scenarios.
    We support providing resources to programs that deal with these 
issues, and we would be happy to discuss the specifics of the proposal 
with your office.

    I understand that it has taken some time for Google and Facebook to 
establish reliable and timely channels to report threats made on your 
platform to the proper authorities. Mr. Slater testified that Google 
now has a strong relationship with the Northern California Regional 
Intelligence Center, who has been effective at quickly getting reports 
of threats into the right hands.

    Question 2. Would you support adding measures to the Jabara-Heyer 
NO HATE Act to expand the NCRIC model of integrated threat reporting 
nationwide?
    Answer. As discussed above, we would be happy to discuss the 
specifics of the proposal with your office.
    When it comes to working with law enforcement, we reach out 
whenever we see a credible threat of imminent harm. We contact federal, 
state, or local law enforcement depending on the specific circumstances 
of a threat. We have a long history of working successfully with the 
Department of Justice, the FBI, state and local law enforcement, and 
other government agencies to address a wide variety of threats on our 
platform, including terrorist threats. We have been able to provide 
support to authorities around the world that are responding to the 
threat of terrorism, including in cases where law enforcement has been 
able to disrupt attacks and prevent harm. We also have law enforcement 
response teams available around the clock to respond to emergency 
requests.

    Question 3. What steps would improve communications channels with 
law enforcement to make sure the right information gets into the right 
hands quickly?
    Answer. Please see the above responses. As discussed, we work 
closely with law enforcement. Indeed, we have been able to provide 
support to authorities around the world that are responding to the 
threat of terrorism, including in cases where law enforcement has been 
able to disrupt attacks and prevent harm.
Amplification of 8Chan and Other Hate Sites
    We have seen over this year that fringe sites are a breeding ground 
for racist and violent hate communities. However, extremists then use 
mainstream platforms to recruit and amplify their hate and ideologies 
to a larger audience. In particular, the site 8chan has had a repeated 
role in multiple mass shootings this year. The perpetrators of 
Christchurch mosque shootings, Poway synagogue shooting, and El Paso 
massacre each posted manifestos to 8chan before their attacks. It is 
also sites such as 8chan that facilitate campaigns of harassment and 
terrorism that target the victims of mass shootings, such as the Sandy 
Hook families. 8chan is currently offline after webhosting providers 
finally cut their ties after the El Paso shootings. However, 8chan's 
owner has said that he plans to revive the site as soon as this week.

    Question 1. Has your company taken any steps to limit the spread of 
8chan content, including the communities that hosted the manifestos of 
shooters, on your platforms?
    Answer. For years, we've worked to block URLs when we identify that 
the content at the URL violates our policies when it is shared on 
Facebook. For example, we blocked links from 8chan and 4chan when the 
content shared violated our policies. And earlier this year, we started 
blocking any link that connects to 8chan's/pol/board, where the 
Christchurch, El Paso, and Poway attacks were advertised and where a 
large amount of other hateful content has appeared.
    We also work with others in the industry to limit the spread of 
violent extremist content on the Internet. For example, in 2017, we 
established the Global Internet Forum to Counter Terrorism (GIFCT) with 
others in the industry with the objective of disrupting terrorist abuse 
on our platforms. Since then, the consortium has grown and collaborates 
closely on critical initiatives focused on tech innovation, knowledge-
sharing, and research. Most recently, we reached our 2019 goal of 
collectively contributing more than 200,000 hashes, or unique digital 
fingerprints, of known terrorist content into our shared database, 
enabling each of us to quickly identify and take action on potential 
terrorist content on our respective platforms.

    Question 2. Please describe the specific steps you to restrict the 
amplification of 8chan and other violent sites on your platforms, 
including what sites you have taken action to restrict.
    Answer. Please see the response to the previous question.
Testing of Consumer Platforms
    Question 1. Please describe the process you use to test and 
evaluate new consumer facing products, including algorithms designed to 
promote forms of engagement. What methods are employed to assess the 
impact of these products on individuals and groups, both for an 
immediate and medium term response?
    Answer. While the specific processes that we use to build and 
evaluate improvements to our services vary by product, we generally 
work to ensure that the features we build meet the needs and 
preferences of our community. Methods we use to hear from our community 
might include inviting people to sit down for one-on-one interviews, 
join focus groups, try new products and features, or keep diaries about 
their experiences with apps over time. We also invite large groups of 
people to take surveys, often via the Facebook app itself--indeed, tens 
of thousands of people opt into taking surveys every week. And with 
more than 2 billion people using Facebook every month, we have to 
carefully consider ways to ensure we are hearing from representative 
swaths of the community, all over the world.
    Before new products and services are launched, company executives 
perform internal reviews, and we often release features slowly so that 
we can understand how people are using new features before they are 
available to everyone on Facebook.
    Changes to our products and services that involve people's personal 
information are also reviewed through a cross-functional evaluation 
process overseen by the Chief Privacy Officer for Product, which 
involves our Chief Privacy Officer for Policy, legal compliance 
experts, and participants from other departments across the company. 
This process is a collaborative approach to privacy that seeks to 
promote strong privacy protections and sound decision-making at every 
stage of the product development process. Moreover, the new FTC Consent 
Order, which has not yet been finalized, will impose new, rigorous 
process and documentation requirements in this area. Our privacy 
program is responsible for reviewing product launches, major changes, 
and privacy-related bug fixes to products and features to ensure that 
privacy policies and procedures are consistently applied and that key 
privacy decisions are implemented. This approach has several key 
benefits:
    First, it is designed to consider privacy early in the product 
development process. This allows us to consider the benefits that a 
feature is intended to have for people who use our services, how data 
will be used to deliver those benefits, and how we can build features 
from the ground up that include privacy protections to enable those 
benefits while protecting people's information and putting them in 
control.
    Second, taking a cross-disciplinary approach to privacy encourages 
us to think about data protection as more than just a compliance 
exercise. Instead, we evaluate how to design privacy into the features 
that we build. We consider this from the perspective of things like 
designing interfaces that make data use intuitive, taking a consistent 
approach to privacy across our services, and building protections in 
how our software is engineered. Accordingly, while we scale our privacy 
review process depending on the complexity of a particular data use, 
reviews typically involve experts who evaluate proposed data practices 
from the perspective of multiple disciplines.
    Facebook also undergoes ongoing privacy assessments to test the 
effectiveness of its privacy controls, which are conducted by an 
independent third-party professional pursuant to the procedures and 
standards generally accepted in the profession. Facebook's privacy 
program and related controls are informed by GAPP principles, which are 
considered industry-leading principles for protecting the privacy and 
security of personal information. We monitor the privacy program and 
update the controls as necessary to reflect evolving risks. And, under 
the new FTC Consent Order, we will continue to undergo these 
independent reviews on a biennial basis.

    Question 2. Do you ever identify unintended consequences of such 
proposed products and then revise them or decide not to launch?
    Answer. As described in the previous response, we test and evaluate 
new products for impacts of various kinds. If we determine that a 
negative impact outweighs the product's potential benefit, we do not 
launch the product.

    Question 3. What testing and measurement methodologies are 
routinely used and how are the product evaluation teams selected? 
Please submit any criteria you have developed for new or revised data 
driven products or applications, including their intended impact, 
demographic reach, and revenue potential.
    Answer. Please see the response to your Question 1.
                                 ______
                                 
     Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Tom Udall to 
                             Monika Bickert
    Question 1. We cannot talk about mass violence without talking 
about the social and political climate that is dividing America. Most 
recently, content that demonizes and spreads hate against immigrant 
communities is proliferating across social media. This content is too 
often indistinguishable from social media posts from some elected 
representatives.
    Facebook announced recently that it would exempt politicians from 
certain rules that prohibit hate speech, incite violence, or post fake 
news. How did Facebook come to the decision that any content posted by 
a political figure should be considered newsworthy, even if it clearly 
espouses hate, incites violence, or is designed to spread 
misinformation? Why does your commitment to protect users from harmful 
content end when the poster is a political figure?
    Answer. Our recent work builds on an existing policy. Since 2016, 
we have assessed newsworthiness on a case-by-case basis, balancing the 
public interest value and the risk associated with the speech.
    We've applied this policy to a range of organic content not limited 
in scope to politicians. We have, for example, allowed as newsworthy 
images that depict war or famine, or that attempt to raise awareness of 
issues like indigenous rights. The newsworthiness analysis does not 
apply to ads.
    Even in the case of politicians' speech, no content is 
automatically deemed newsworthy. Newsworthiness requires a balancing 
test to make a determination of the public interest value versus the 
potential for harm. We take a number of factors into consideration, 
including country-specific context such as whether there is an election 
underway or the country is at war, as well as the speaker and subject 
matter of the speech, such as whether it relates to governance or 
politics.
    In evaluating the risk of harm, we will consider the severity of 
the harm. Content that has the potential to incite violence poses a 
safety risk that we will take into account. And there are some types of 
violations--for example, the posting of terrorist propaganda or voter 
suppression--where the risk of harm will always override any public 
interest value.
    When it comes to fact checking, we rely on third-party fact-
checkers to help reduce the spread of false news and other types of 
viral misinformation, like memes or manipulated photos and videos. We 
don't believe, however, that it is an appropriate role for us to 
referee political debates and prevent a politician's speech from 
reaching its audience and being subject to public debate and scrutiny. 
This is some of the most scrutinized speech in our society, and we 
believe people should decide what is credible, not tech companies. 
That's why politicians are not subject to Facebook's third-party fact-
checking program. We have had this policy on the books for over a year 
now, posted publicly on our site under our eligibility guidelines. This 
means that we will not send organic content or ads from politicians to 
our third-party fact-checking partners for review. However, when a 
politician shares previously debunked content, we will demote that 
content, display related information from fact-checkers, and reject its 
inclusion in advertisements.

    Question 2. Knowing that the problem of extremism and mass violence 
extends beyond the screen, I would like you to describe your 
partnerships with communities and organizations around the country to 
fight against extremism and hate. What are you doing to promote their 
voices on your platforms? Moreover, what makes them effective?
    Answer. We are proud of the work we have done to make Facebook a 
hostile place for those committed to acts of violence. We understand, 
however, that simply working to keep violence off Facebook is not an 
adequate solution to the problem of online extremism and violence, 
particularly because bad actors can leverage a variety of platforms and 
operate offline as well. We believe our partnerships with other 
companies, civil society, researchers, and governments are crucial to 
combating this threat. For example, our P2P Global Digital Challenge, 
which engages university students around the world in competitions to 
create social media campaigns and offline strategies to challenge 
hateful and extremist narratives, has launched over 600 counterspeech 
campaigns from students in 75 countries, engaged over 6,500 students, 
and reached over 200 million people. We're also partnering with Life 
After Hate, an organization founded by former violent extremists, to 
connect people who search for terms associated with white supremacy to 
resources focused on helping people leave behind hate groups.
    And we are continuing our work with the Global Internet Forum to 
Counter Terrorism (GIFCT), an endeavor that focuses on fighting 
terrorism and extremism through knowledge sharing, support for 
counterterrorism work, and technical cooperation. In September, GIFCT 
released a digital Campaign Toolkit produced by the Institute for 
Strategic Dialogue that instructs NGOs running online counterspeech 
programs in best practices for utilizing a range of digital platforms. 
Just as bad actors utilize a range of platforms to get their message 
out, so must counterspeech practitioners. For more information, please 
see https://www.campaigntool
kit.org.
    GIFCT recently announced that it will become an independent 
organization led by an Executive Director and supported by dedicated 
technology, counterterrorism, and operations teams. Evolving and 
institutionalizing GIFCT's structure from a consortium of member 
companies will build on our early achievements and deepen industry 
collaboration with experts, partners, and government stakeholders--all 
in an effort to thwart increasingly sophisticated efforts by terrorists 
and violent extremists to abuse digital platforms.

    Question 3. We are entering another election year and we know that 
foreign actors have amplified divisive rhetoric on social media and, in 
some cases, orchestrated actual protests. What specific actions are you 
taking to prepare for 2020 to prevent Russia and other foreign actors 
from trying to inflame racial and political tensions through social 
media?
    We have a responsibility to stop abuse and election interference on 
our platform. That's why we've made significant investments since 2016 
to better identify new threats, close vulnerabilities, and reduce the 
spread of viral misinformation and fake accounts.
Combating Inauthentic Behavior
    Over the last three years, we've worked to identify new and 
emerging threats and remove coordinated inauthentic behavior across our 
apps. In the past year alone, we've taken down over 50 networks 
worldwide, many ahead of major democratic elections. As part of our 
effort to counter foreign influence campaigns, most recently we removed 
three networks of accounts, Pages, and Groups on Facebook and Instagram 
for engaging in foreign interference. These manipulation campaigns 
originated in Russia and targeted a number of countries in Africa. We 
have identified these manipulation campaigns as part of our internal 
investigations into suspected Russia-linked inauthentic behavior in the 
region.
    We took down these networks based on their behavior, not the 
content they posted. In each case, the people behind this activity 
coordinated with one another and used fake accounts to misrepresent 
themselves, and that was the basis for our action. We have shared our 
findings with law enforcement and industry partners. More details can 
be found at https://newsroom.fb.com/news/2019/10/removing-more-
coordinated-inauthentic-behavior-from-Russia. As we've improved our 
ability to disrupt these operations, we've also built a deeper 
understanding of different threats and how best to counter them. We 
investigate and enforce against any type of inauthentic behavior.
Protecting the Accounts of Candidates, Elected Officials, and Their 
        Teams
    We also recently launched Facebook Protect to further secure the 
accounts of elected officials, candidates, their staff, and others who 
may be particularly vulnerable to targeting by hackers and foreign 
adversaries. As we've seen in past elections, they can be targets of 
malicious activity. However, because campaigns are generally run for a 
short period of time, we do not always know who these campaign-
affiliated people are, making it harder to help protect them.
    Page admins can enroll their organization's Facebook and Instagram 
accounts in Facebook Protect and invite members of their organization 
to participate in the program as well. Participants will be required to 
turn on two-factor authentication, and their accounts will be monitored 
for hacking, such as login attempts from unusual locations or 
unverified devices. And, if we discover an attack against one account, 
we can review and protect other accounts affiliated with that same 
organization that are enrolled in our program. You can find more 
information about Facebook Protect at https://www.facebook.com/gpa/
facebook-protect.
Making Pages More Transparent
    We want to make sure people are using Facebook authentically and 
that they understand who is speaking to them. Over the past year, we've 
taken steps to ensure Pages are authentic and more transparent by 
showing people the Page's primary country location, whether the Page 
has merged with other Pages, and information about the organization 
that owns the Page. This gives people more context on the Page and 
makes it easier to understand who is behind it.
Labeling State-Controlled Media
    We want to help people better understand the sources of news 
content they see on Facebook so they can make informed decisions about 
what they are reading. We will soon begin labeling media outlets that 
are wholly or partially under the editorial control of their government 
as state-controlled media. This label will be on both their Page and in 
our Ad Library. We will hold these Pages to a higher standard of 
transparency because they combine the opinion-making influence of a 
media organization with the strategic backing of a state.
Making it Easier to Understand Political Ads
    Throughout this year, we've been expanding our work around the 
world to increase authenticity and transparency around political 
advertising because we know how important it is that people understand 
who is publishing the ads that they see. We have now launched our 
publicly searchable Ad Library in over 190 countries and territories. 
We allow advertisers to be authorized to purchase political ads and we 
give people more information about ads that concern social issues, 
elections, or politics. We require the use of these transparency tools 
in over 50 jurisdictions, and we make them available for voluntary use 
in over 140 others, to provide the option of greater transparency and 
accountability.
    We have added a variety of features to our ads transparency tools 
to help journalists, lawmakers, researchers, and others learn more 
about the ads they see, including information about how much candidates 
have spent on ads. And soon we will also begin testing a new database 
with researchers that will enable them to quickly download the entire 
Ad Library, pull daily snapshots, and track day-to-day changes.
More Resources for Rapid Response for Elections
    We have set up regional operations centers focused on election 
integrity in California, Dublin, and Singapore. These hubs allow our 
global teams to better work across regions in the run-up to elections 
and further strengthen our coordination and response time between staff 
in Menlo Park and in-country. These teams add a layer of defense 
against fake news, hate speech, and voter suppression and work cross-
functionally with our threat intelligence, data science, engineering, 
research, community operations, legal, and other teams.
Preventing the Spread of Viral Misinformation
    On Facebook and Instagram, we work to keep confirmed misinformation 
from spreading. For example, we reduce its distribution so fewer people 
see it--on Instagram, we remove it from Explore and hashtags, and on 
Facebook, we reduce its distribution in News Feed. On Instagram, we 
also make content from accounts that repeatedly post misinformation 
harder to find, for example by filtering content from that account from 
Explore and hashtag pages. And on Facebook, if Pages, domains, or 
Groups repeatedly share misinformation, we'll continue to reduce their 
overall distribution, and we'll place restrictions on the Page's 
ability to advertise and monetize.
    Over the coming weeks, content across Facebook and Instagram that 
has been rated false or partly false by a third-party fact-checker will 
start to be more prominently labeled so that people can better decide 
for themselves what to read, trust, and share. Labels will be shown on 
top of false and partly false photos and videos, including on top of 
Stories content on Instagram, and will link out to the assessment from 
the fact-checker.
    Much like we do on Facebook when people try to share known 
misinformation, we are also introducing a new pop-up that will appear 
when people attempt to share posts on Instagram that include content 
that has been debunked by third-party fact-checkers.
    In addition to clearer labels, we are also working to take faster 
action to prevent misinformation from going viral, especially given 
that quality reporting and fact-checking takes time. In many countries, 
including in the US, if we have signals that a piece of content is 
false, we temporarily reduce its distribution pending review by a 
third-party fact-checker.
Fighting Voter Suppression and Intimidation
    Attempts to interfere with or suppress voting undermine our core 
values as a company, and we work proactively to remove this type of 
harmful content. Ahead of the 2018 midterm elections, we extended our 
voter suppression and intimidation policies to prohibit:

   Misrepresentation of the dates, locations, times, and 
        methods for voting or voter registration (e.g., ``Vote by 
        text!'');

   Misrepresentation of who can vote, qualifications for 
        voting, whether a vote will be counted, and what information 
        and/or materials must be provided in order to vote (e.g., ``If 
        you voted in the primary, your vote in the general election 
        won't count.''); and

   Threats of violence relating to voting, voter registration, 
        or the outcome of an election.

    We remove this type of content regardless of who it's coming from. 
Ahead of the midterm elections, our Elections Operations Center removed 
more than 45,000 pieces of content that violated these policies--more 
than 90 percent of which our systems detected before anyone reported 
the content to us.
    In advance of the U.S. 2020 elections, we're implementing 
additional policies and expanding our technical capabilities on 
Facebook and Instagram to protect the integrity of the election. 
Following up on a commitment we made in the civil rights audit report 
released in June, we have now implemented our policy banning paid 
advertising that suggests voting is useless or meaningless or advises 
people not to vote. In addition, our systems are now more effective at 
proactively detecting and removing this harmful content. We use machine 
learning to help us quickly identify potentially incorrect voting 
information and remove it.
    We are also continuing to expand and develop our partnerships to 
provide expertise on trends in voter suppression and intimidation, as 
well as early detection of violating content. This includes working 
directly with secretaries of state and election directors to address 
localized voter suppression that may only be occurring in a single 
state or district. This work will be supported by our Elections 
Operations Center during both the primary and general elections.
Helping People Better Understand What They See Online
    Part of our work to stop the spread of misinformation is helping 
people spot it for themselves. That's why we partner with organizations 
and experts in media literacy. We recently announced an initial 
investment of $2 million to support projects that empower people to 
determine what to read and share--both on Facebook and elsewhere.
    These projects range from training programs to help ensure the 
largest Instagram accounts have the resources they need to reduce the 
spread of misinformation, to expanding a pilot program that brings 
together senior citizens and high school students to learn about online 
safety and media literacy, to public events in local venues like 
bookstores, community centers, and libraries in cities across the 
country. We're also supporting a series of training events focused on 
critical thinking among first-time voters.
    In addition, we're including a new series of media literacy lessons 
in our Digital Literacy Library. These lessons are drawn from the Youth 
and Media team at the Berkman Klein Center for Internet & Society at 
Harvard University, which has made them available for free worldwide 
under a Creative Commons license. The lessons, created for middle and 
high school educators, are designed to be interactive and cover topics 
ranging from assessing the quality of the information online to more 
technical skills like reverse image search.

    Question 4. Regarding the shared industry database of hashes linked 
to content that promotes terrorism; I would like to understand the 
thresholds for including certain content in the database. Who makes the 
decision to include content in that database and how is that decision 
made? What percent of that database concerns white nationalist or other 
domestic extremist content?
    Answer. Facebook's internal terrorism definition applies to a wide 
range of terrorist actors, regardless of ideology or designation by 
governments or intergovernmental entities. We have designated more than 
200 white supremacist organizations under our broader Dangerous 
Organizations policy. For the purposes of the hash-sharing database, 
GIFCT uses the UN's Consolidated Sanctions List to identify groups for 
which we will share hashes of any terrorist-related content or 
propaganda found. Following the Christchurch attack, we have also 
developed a Content Incident Protocol (CIP), which enables companies to 
share hashes related to propaganda produced by attackers during a 
terrorist attack. The CIP was deployed for the first time after the 
October 9 attack in Halle, Germany.
    Companies also agreed upon a basic taxonomy to describe the type of 
content ingested into the hash-sharing database. The taxonomy includes 
the following labels that are applied to the content when a company 
adds hashes to the shared database:

   Imminent Credible Threat: A public posting of a specific, 
        imminent, credible threat of violence toward non-combatants 
        and/or civilian infrastructure.

   Graphic Violence Against Defenseless People: The murder, 
        execution, rape, torture, or infliction of serious bodily harm 
        on defenseless people (prisoner exploitation, obvious non-
        combatants being targeted).

   Glorification of Terrorist Acts: Content that glorifies, 
        praises, condones, or celebrates attacks after the fact.

   Recruitment and Instruction: Materials that seek to recruit 
        followers, give guidance, or instruct them operationally.

   New Zealand Perpetrator Content: The GIFCT set a new 
        precedent in the wake of the New Zealand terrorist attack. Due 
        to the virality and cross-platform spread of the attacker's 
        manifesto and attack video, and because New Zealand authorities 
        deemed all manifesto and attack video content illegal, the 
        GIFCT created a crisis bank to mitigate the spread of this 
        content.

    GIFCT categorizes the content ingested based on these categories. 
As of July 2019, the breakdown of the content in the database is as 
follows:

   Imminent Credible Threat: 0.4 percent

   Graphic Violence Against Defenseless People: 4.8 percent

   Glorification of Terrorist Acts: 85.5 percent

   Radicalization, Recruitment, Instruction: 9.1 percent

    New Zealand Perpetrator Content: 0.6 percent
                                 ______
                                 
    Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Jacky Rosen to 
                             Monika Bickert
    Question 1. The challenge for social media platforms prohibiting 
certain types of behavior on their sites is creating clear and concise 
rules for users to comply. Offensive conduct isn't a static issue, and 
as technology has evolved, so have our definitions of what constitutes 
abusive behavior such as cyberbullying and misinformation campaigns.

   Can you explain to us how your companies come up with rules 
        regarding hateful speech and how those rules have evolved? What 
        are your guidelines for determining when charged rhetoric 
        crosses the line into becoming hate speech? For example, how do 
        you determine if rhetoric is anti-Semitic?

    Answer. We do not allow hate speech on Facebook because it creates 
an environment of intimidation and exclusion and in some cases may 
promote real-world violence.
    We define ``hate speech'' as a direct attack on people based on 
what we call protected characteristics--race, ethnicity, national 
origin, religious affiliation, sexual orientation, caste, sex, gender, 
gender identity, and serious disease or disability. We also provide 
some protections for immigration status. We define ``attack'' as 
violent or dehumanizing speech, statements of inferiority, or calls for 
exclusion or segregation. We separate attacks into three tiers of 
severity, as described in our published Community Standards. For more 
information, please see https://www.facebook
.com/communitystandards/hate_speech.

   How closely do you work with outside groups, researchers, 
        and users to come up with definitions of what constitutes hate 
        and abusive speech and policies to deal with ambiguous cases? 
        For instance, have you worked with the Anti-Defamation League 
        or other groups combating hate when determining guidelines?
    Answer. Facebook has partnerships with a broad range of U.S. and 
international NGOs, academics, and experts who study organized hate 
groups. These academics and experts share information with Facebook on 
how organizations are adapting to social media and give feedback on how 
Facebook might better tackle these problems.

    Question 2. With almost three and a half billion social media users 
worldwide--and one million users joining every day--social media 
platforms have turned to a mix of machine learning and human moderators 
to detect and take down hate speech, terrorist propaganda, cyber-
bullying, and disinformation. Machine learning can be a useful tool in 
identifying objectionable content quickly, preventing it from 
spreading. However, there are concerns about its ability to understand 
the context of text or images, and the length of time it takes to train 
systems with new data to recognize objectionable content.

   Can you give us an estimate of how many content moderation 
        decisions are made by your machine learning systems? And can 
        you provide an estimated error rate for content flagged by 
        machine learning?

    Answer. We don't have an either-or approach to reviewing content. 
All content goes through some degree of automated review, and we use 
human reviewers to check some content that has been flagged by that 
automated review or reported by people that use Facebook. We also use 
human reviewers to perform reviews of content that was not flagged or 
reported to check the accuracy and efficiency of our automated review 
systems. The percentage of content that is reviewed by a human varies 
widely depending on the type and context of the content, and we don't 
target a specific percentage across all content on Facebook.

   Are there instances where machine learning is more effective 
        in flagging certain content than others? Does the error rate 
        change significantly from one type of content to another?

    Answer. AI tools lend themselves toward identifying certain content 
more easily than others. For example, we are better able to enforce our 
nudity policies with automated tools than we are hate speech, due to 
the linguistic and cultural nuances involved. One area in which we have 
made significant progress is the detection of terrorist content. We 
proactively detect 99 percent of the ISIS-and Al Qaeda-related content 
that we remove before someone reports it. And we are committed to 
continuing to improve our technology across different types of content.
                                 ______
                                 
 Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Shelley Moore Capito 
                            to Nick Pickles
    Question 1. I applaud Twitter's engagement and collaboration with 
the Global Internet Forum to Counter Terrorism (GIFCT). As you 
mentioned in your testimony, Twitter has already started partnering 
with smaller tech companies to share best practices and continues to 
partner with additional companies. What are some of the smaller 
community groups Twitter has been working with and what are some of the 
best practices you plan on sharing for combatting extremism?
    Answer. Collaboration with our industry peers and civil society is 
critically important to addressing common threats from terrorism 
globally. In June 2017, we launched the Global Internet Forum to 
Counter Terrorism (the ``GIFCT''), a partnership among Twitter, 
YouTube, Facebook, and Microsoft.
    The GIFCT facilitates, among other things: information sharing; 
technical cooperation; and, research collaboration, including with 
academic institutions. In September 2017, the members of the GIFCT 
announced a significant financial commitment to support research on 
terrorist abuse of the Internet and how governments, tech companies, 
and civil society can respond effectively. Our goal is to establish a 
network of experts that can develop platform-agnostic research 
questions and analysis that consider a range of geopolitical contexts.
    Technological collaboration is a key part of GIFCT's work. In the 
first two years of GIFCT, two projects have provided technical 
resources to support the work of members and smaller companies to 
remove terrorist content.
    First, the shared industry database of ``hashes''--unique digital 
``fingerprints''--for violent terrorist propaganda now has more than 
100,000 hashes. The database allows a company that discovers terrorist 
content on one of its sites to create a digital fingerprint and share 
it with the other companies in the forum, who can then use those hashes 
to identify such content on their services or platforms, review against 
their respective policies and individual rules, and remove matching 
content as appropriate or block extremist content before it is posted.
    Second, a year ago, Twitter began working with a small group of 
companies to test a new collaborative system. Because Twitter does not 
allow files other than photos or short videos to be uploaded, one of 
the behaviors we saw from those seeking to promote terrorism was to 
post links to other services where people could access files, longer 
videos, PDFs, and other materials. Our pilot system allows us to alert 
other companies when we removed an account or Tweet that linked to 
material that promoted terrorism hosted on their service. This 
information sharing ensures the hosting companies can monitor and track 
similar behavior, taking enforcement action pursuant with their 
individual policies. This is not a high-tech approach, but it is simple 
and effective, recognizing the resource constraints of smaller 
companies.
    Based on positive feedback, the partnership has now expanded to 12 
companies and we have shared more than 12,000 unique URLs with these 
services. Every time a piece of content is removed at source, it means 
any link to that source--wherever it is posted--will no longer be 
operational.
    We are eager to partner with additional companies to expand this 
project, and we look forward to building on our existing partnerships 
in the future.
    Separately, Twitter provides training to civil society groups 
around the globe that work on preventing and combating violent 
extremism in their communities. These trainings aim to help credible 
organizations amplify their voices using Twitter tools and cover a wide 
range of best practices, which are summarized in our NGO training 
handbook. Twitter does not advise on the specifics of the message, as 
these partners are best placed to craft their own authentic content. We 
are happy to provide a copy of the handbook upon request.
    In addition, Twitter has helped amplify the voices and reach of 
these organizations through in-kind assistance in the form of donated 
advertising credit, both on Twitter and offline. Recently, for example, 
Twitter donated advertising space in New York City to Parents for 
Peace, an NGO founded and run by former extremists and families 
impacted by extremism which aims to prevent radicalization.

    Question 2. This Committee has held a number of hearings on the 
rise and importance of artificial intelligence (AI) in today's digital 
economy. AI has been invaluable in collecting and sorting massive 
amounts of data. In the case of today's hearing, AI has become critical 
in order to identify radicalization and terrorist threats. Each company 
has identified key tools each company uses in identifying bad actors on 
your platforms, but machine learning being one of the most critical. 
What factors are given priority when determining radicalized or 
terrorist content?

    a. You also mention the importance of human expertise in 
determining more nuanced cases. When does human expertise step in after 
AI has identified or flags content?

    b. After content has been flagged for law enforcement involvement, 
what is the process that takes place afterward? Does that content get 
sent to the FBI and then disseminated to state law enforcement?
    Answer. Twitter's philosophy is to take a behavior-led approach, 
utilizing a combination of machine learning and human review to 
prioritize reports and improve the health of the public conversation. 
That is to say, we increasingly look at how accounts behave before we 
look at the content they are posting. This is how we seek to scale our 
efforts globally and leverage technology even where the language used 
is highly context specific. Twitter employs content detection 
technology to identify potentially abusive content on the service, 
along with allowing users to report content to us either as an 
individual or as a bystander.
    We suspended more than 1.5 million accounts for violations related 
to the promotion of terrorism between August 1, 2015, and December 31, 
2018. In 2018, a total of 371,669 accounts were suspended for 
violations related to promotion of terrorism. We continue to see more 
than 90 percent of these accounts suspended through proactive measures.
    The trend we are observing year-over-year is a steady decrease in 
terrorist organizations attempting to use our service. This is due to 
zero-tolerance policy enforcement that allows us to take swift action 
on ban evaders and other identified forms of behavior used by terrorist 
entities and their affiliates. In the majority of cases, we take action 
at the account creation stage--before the account even Tweets.
    The long term challenge for industry is the availability and 
sharing of training data for AI and machine learning models. Good 
progress has been made in cross-industry collaboration on a number of 
fronts, but this is an area where more can be done.
    We have well-established relationships with law enforcement 
agencies, and we look forward to continued cooperation with them on 
these issues, as often only they have access to information critical to 
our joint efforts to stop bad faith actors. The threat we face requires 
extensive partnership and collaboration with our government partners 
and industry peers. We have continuous internal coverage to address 
requests from law enforcement around the world and have a portal to 
swiftly handle law enforcement requests rendered by appropriate legal 
process.
    If we have a good faith belief that there is an imminent threat of 
death or serious physical harm to an identifiable person or group, and 
we have information that we believe is relevant to mitigating that 
threat, we share such information with law enforcement. We become aware 
of such threats through reports to our content moderation team, or 
through an Emergency Request submitted by law enforcement.
    Twitter does not have a role in how information is shared between 
the FBI and other law enforcement entities.
                                 ______
                                 
 Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Richard Blumenthal to 
                              Nick Pickles
NO HATE Act and Reporting
    I have introduced legislation, the Jabara-Heyer NO HATE Act, which 
would help states implement and train officers in the National 
Incident-Based Reporting Systems. The NO HATE Act would also provide 
grants to states to better address hate crimes by training law 
enforcement, establish specialized units, create community relations 
programs, and run hate crime hotlines.
    Question. Do you support the Jabara-Heyer NO HATE Act?
    Answer. Twitter believes that successfully combating violent 
extremism requires a whole of society approach, including at the 
grassroots and community-based level. Twitter has a positive working 
relationship with law enforcement agencies, that play a key role in 
preventing and addressing violent extremism. Twitter supports efforts 
that seek to strengthen the ability of both community groups and law 
enforcement agencies to more effectively address violent extremism.

    I understand that it has taken some time for Google and Facebook to 
establish reliable and timely channels to report threats made on your 
platform to the proper authorities. Mr. Slater testified that Google 
now has a strong relationship with the Northern California Regional 
Intelligence Center, who has been effective at quickly getting reports 
of threats into the right hands.
    Question 1. Would you support adding measures to the Jabara-Heyer 
NO HATE Act to expand the NCRIC model of integrated threat reporting 
nationwide?
    Answer. Twitter supports efforts that seek to strengthen the 
ability of law enforcement agencies to more effectively address violent 
extremism within appropriate legal frameworks.

    Question 2. What steps would improve communications channels with 
law enforcement to make sure the right information gets into the right 
hands quickly?
    Answer. Twitter has well-established relationships with law 
enforcement agencies, and we look forward to continued cooperation with 
them on these issues, as often only they have access to information 
critical to our joint efforts to stop bad faith actors. The threat we 
face requires extensive partnership and collaboration with our 
government partners and industry peers. We have continuous internal 
coverage to address reports from law enforcement around the world and 
have a portal to swiftly handle law enforcement requests rendered by 
appropriate legal process.
    We encourage law enforcement and other government agencies to 
consider whether it is possible to move more quickly to declassify 
information that may be useful to industry in assessing and reacting to 
the changing nature of bad actors.
Amplification of 8Chan and Other Hate Sites
    We have seen over this year that fringe sites are a breeding ground 
for racist and violent hate communities. However, extremists then use 
mainstream platforms to recruit and amplify their hate and ideologies 
to a larger audience. In particular, the site 8chan has had a repeated 
role in multiple mass shootings this year. The perpetrators of 
Christchurch mosque shootings, Poway synagogue shooting, and El Paso 
massacre each posted manifestos to 8chan before their attacks. It is 
also sites such as 8chan that facilitate campaigns of harassment and 
terrorism that target the victims of mass shootings, such as the Sandy 
Hook families. 8chan is currently offline after webhosting providers 
finally cut their ties after the El Paso shootings. However, 8chan's 
owner has said that he plans to revive the site as soon as this week.
    Question 1. Has your company taken any steps to limit the spread of 
8chan content, including the communities that hosted the manifestos of 
shooters, on your platforms?
    Answer. Twitter is committed to improving our ability to stop the 
rapid spread of violent extremist content. We are implementing a number 
of actions from lessons we learned from the Christchurch attack.
    For example, the distribution of media immediately after the 
Christchurch attack was manifestly different from how ISIS and other 
terrorist groups had historically operated. These changes in the wider 
threat environment require a renewed approach and a focus on immediate 
crisis response.
    In the immediate hours after the Christchurch shootings, an array 
of individuals sought continuously to re-upload the content created by 
the attacker, both the video and his manifesto, including this same 
content hosted on third party services.
    The Twitter rules make clear that we do not allow material to be 
shared that threatens violence against an individual or group of 
people, the glorification of violence or the promotion of terrorism. We 
regard manifestos as falling under this rule.
    As such, we will take action to limit the ability of individuals to 
share materials, including raw video files and manifestos, wherever 
they are posted, including on third party services.

    Question 2. Please describe the specific steps you to restrict the 
amplification of 8chan and other violent sites on your platforms, 
including what sites you have taken action to restrict.
    Answer. We are taking a number of steps, many in collaboration with 
our GIFCT peers, to tackle the challenge of violent content that may 
spread to our platform from another location on the Internet, including 
but not limited to 8chan.
    In addition to our commitment to the Christchurch Call, Twitter and 
other leading websites recently voluntarily committed to the following 
five distinct actions:

  1.  Terms of Service. First, we committed to updating our terms of 
        use, community standards, codes of conduct, and acceptable use 
        policies to expressly prohibit the distribution of terrorist 
        and violent extremist content. We believe this is important to 
        establish baseline expectations for users and to articulate a 
        clear basis for removal of this content from our platforms and 
        services and suspension or closure of accounts distributing 
        such content.

  2.  User Reporting of Terrorist and Violent Extremist Content. 
        Second, we committed to establishing one or more methods within 
        our online platforms and services for users to report or flag 
        inappropriate content, including terrorist and violent 
        extremist content. We will ensure that the reporting mechanisms 
        are clear, conspicuous, and easy to use, and provide enough 
        categorical granularity to allow us to prioritize and act 
        promptly upon notification of terrorist or violent extremist 
        content.

  3.  Enhancing Technology. Third, we committed to continuing to invest 
        in technology that improves our capability to detect and remove 
        terrorist and violent extremist content online, including the 
        extension or development of digital fingerprinting and AI-based 
        technology solutions.

  4.  Livestreaming. Fourth, we committed to identifying appropriate 
        checks on livestreaming, aimed at reducing the risk of 
        disseminating terrorist and violent extremist content online. 
        These may include enhanced vetting measures (such as streamer 
        ratings or scores, account activity, or validation processes) 
        and moderation of certain livestreaming events where 
        appropriate. Checks on livestreaming will necessarily be 
        tailored to the context of specific livestreaming services, 
        including the type of audience, the nature or character of the 
        livestreaming service, and the likelihood of exploitation.

  5.  Transparency Reports. Finally, we committed to publishing on a 
        regular basis transparency reports regarding detection and 
        removal of terrorist or violent extremist content on our online 
        platforms and services and ensuring that the data is supported 
        by a reasonable and explainable methodology.

    In addition, all members of the GIFCT committed to the following 
four collaborative actions:

  1.  Share Technology Development. We committed to working 
        collaboratively across industry, governments, educational 
        institutions, and NGOs to develop a shared understanding of the 
        contexts in which terrorist and violent extremist content is 
        published and to improve technology to detect and remove 
        terrorist and violent extremist content more effectively and 
        efficiently. This will include:

     Work to create robust shared data sets to accelerate 
            machine learning and AI and sharing insights and learnings 
            from the data.

     Development of open source or other shared tools to 
            detect and remove terrorist or violent extremist content.

     Enablement of all companies, large and small, to 
            contribute to the collective effort and to better address 
            detection and removal of this content on their platforms 
            and services.

  2.  Crisis Protocols. We also committed to working collaboratively 
        across industry, governments, and NGOs to create a protocol for 
        responding to emerging or active events, on an urgent basis, so 
        relevant information can be quickly and efficiently shared, 
        processed, and acted upon by all stakeholders with minimal 
        delay. This includes the establishment of incident management 
        teams that coordinate actions and broadly distribute 
        information that is in the public interest.

  3.  Education. Third, we committed to working collaboratively across 
        industry, governments, educational institutions, and NGOs to 
        help understand and educate the public about terrorist and 
        extremist violent content online. This education includes 
        reminding users about how to report or otherwise not contribute 
        to the spread of this content online.

  4.  Combating Hate and Bigotry. Finally, we committed to working 
        collaboratively across industry to attack the root causes of 
        extremism and hate online. This includes providing greater 
        support for relevant research--with an emphasis on the impact 
        of online hate on offline discrimination and violence--and 
        supporting capacity and capability of NGOs working to challenge 
        hate and promote pluralism and respect online.
Testing of Consumer Platforms
    Question 1. Please describe the process you use to test and 
evaluate new consumer facing products, including algorithms designed to 
promote forms of engagement. What methods are employed to assess the 
impact of these products on individuals and groups, both for an 
immediate and medium term response?
    Answer. We want Twitter to provide a useful, relevant experience to 
all people using our service. With hundreds of millions of Tweets per 
day on Twitter, we have invested heavily in building systems that 
organize content on Twitter alongside tools for individuals to control 
their own experience. At the core of the Twitter service is the 
individual's choice of which accounts to follow, and thus, are shown in 
their home timeline. We want to help our customers to have an 
informative and enjoyable experience on Twitter by doing some of the 
work to surface content of interest.
    With 335 million people using Twitter every month, in dozens of 
languages and countless cultural contexts, we rely upon machine-
learning algorithms to help us organize content. Twitter uses a range 
of algorithms and behavioral signals to determine how Tweets are 
organized and presented in the home timeline, conversations, and search 
based on relevance to individuals. Individuals can control themselves 
whether to see their home timeline without any algorithmic processing 
or instead with our suggested ranking. We are constantly iterating our 
product to provide the best possible experience to all people using our 
service.
    A wide range of teams are involved in assessing potential product 
and policy changes, from a broad range of perspectives. This includes 
work to understand how algorithms are functioning.

    Question 2. Do you ever identify unintended consequences of such 
proposed products and then revise them or decide not to launch?
    Answer. Yes. We are constantly iterating our product to provide the 
best possible experience to all people using our service. Our teams 
implement rigorous processes to think through all aspects of potential 
product changes to ensure they respect consumer privacy and further our 
goal of fostering healthy public conversation.

    Question 3. What testing and measurement methodologies are 
routinely used and how are the product evaluation teams selected? 
Please submit any criteria you have developed for new or revised data 
driven products or applications, including their intended impact, 
demographic reach, and revenue potential.
    Answer. We use a range of criteria to evaluate the success of our 
work. For example, in April 2019, we published a range of metrics that 
demonstrate the different ways we seek to measure our progress.

   38 percent of abusive content that's enforced is surfaced 
        proactively to our internal teams for review instead of relying 
        on external reports from people on Twitter.

   16 percent fewer abuse reports after an interaction from an 
        account the external reporter doesn't follow.

   100,000 accounts suspended for creating new accounts after a 
        previous suspension during January-March 2019--a 45 percent 
        increase from the same time last year.

   60 percent faster response to appeals requests with our new 
        in-app appeal process.

   3 times more abusive accounts suspended within 24 hours 
        after a report compared to the same time last year.

   2.5 times more private information removed with a new, 
        easier reporting process.

    We continue to work with outside partners to develop a framework 
for measuring healthy conversation, following an international call for 
proposals. This will not be a quick or simple process, but we are 
investing in the long-term health of the public conversation online.
                                 ______
                                 
     Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Tom Udall to 
                              Nick Pickles
    Question 1. We cannot talk about mass violence without talking 
about the social and political climate that is dividing America. Most 
recently, content that demonizes and spreads hate against immigrant 
communities is proliferating across social media. This content is too 
often indistinguishable from social media posts from some elected 
representatives. How does your company define hate speech?
    Answer. Twitter has a policy against hateful conduct. Under this 
policy, people on Twitter are not permitted to promote violence against 
or directly attack or threaten other people on the basis of race, 
ethnicity, national origin, sexual orientation, gender, gender 
identity, religious affiliation, age, disability, or serious disease. 
We also do not allow accounts whose primary purpose is inciting harm 
toward others on the basis of these categories.
    We do not allow individuals to use hateful images or symbols in 
their profile image or profile header. Individuals on the platform are 
not allowed to use the username, display name, or profile bio to engage 
in abusive behavior, such as targeted harassment or expressing hate 
toward a person, group, or protected category.
    Under this policy, we take action against behavior that targets 
individuals or an entire protected category with hateful conduct.
    When determining the penalty for violating our hateful conduct 
policy, we consider a number of factors including, but not limited to 
the severity of the violation and an individual's previous record of 
rule violations. For example, we may ask someone to remove the 
violating content and serve a period of time in read-only mode before 
they can Tweet again. Subsequent violations will lead to longer read-
only periods and may eventually result in permanent account suspension. 
If an account is engaging primarily in abusive behavior, or is deemed 
to have shared a violent threat, we will permanently suspend the 
account upon initial review.

    Question 1a. And how do you address situations when content that 
meets that definition comes from a political leader?
    Answer. When it comes to the actions of world leaders on Twitter, 
we recognize that this is largely new ground and with important 
implications. We understand the desire for our decisions to be ``yes/
no'' binaries, but it's not that simple. The actions we take and 
policies we develop will help set precedents around online speech and 
we owe it to the people we serve to be deliberate and considered in 
what we do.
    Twitter's mission is to provide a forum that enables people to be 
informed and to engage their leaders directly. We also have a 
responsibility to the people who use Twitter to better explain why we 
make the decisions we make, which we will do here.
    We assess reported Tweets from world leaders against the Twitter 
Rules, which are designed to ensure people can participate in the 
public conversation freely and safely. We focus on the language of 
reported Tweets and do not attempt to determine all potential 
interpretations of the content or its intent.
    Direct interactions with fellow public figures, comments on 
political issues of the day, or foreign policy saber rattling on 
economic or military issues are generally not in violation of the 
Twitter Rules. However, if a Tweet from a world leader does violate the 
Twitter Rules but there is a clear public interest value to keeping the 
Tweet on the service, we may place it behind a notice that provides 
context about the violation and allows people to click through should 
they wish to see the content. We announced this in June 2019.
    Our goal is to enforce our rules judiciously and impartially. In 
doing so, we aim to provide more insight into our enforcement decision-
making, to serve public conversation, and protect the public's right to 
hear from their leaders and to hold these same leaders to account.

    Question 2. Knowing that the problem of extremism and mass violence 
extends beyond the screen, I would like you to describe your 
partnerships with communities and organizations around the country to 
fight against extremism and hate. What are you doing to promote their 
voices on your platforms? And what makes them effective?
    Answer. Twitter works around the globe to support civil society 
voices and promote positive messages. Twitter provides regular 
trainings to local, credible groups on five continents on how to 
amplify their content using our tools. In addition, we have provided 
pro-bono advertising to groups to enable their messages to reach 
millions of people. When we at Twitter talk about the health of the 
public conversation, we see the principles of civility, empathy, and 
mutual respect as foundational to our work. We will not solve problems 
by removing content alone. We should not underestimate the power of 
open conversation to change minds, perspectives, and behaviors.

    Question 3. We are entering another election year and we know that 
foreign actors have amplified divisive rhetoric on social media and, in 
some cases, orchestrated actual protests. What specific actions are you 
taking to prepare for 2020 to prevent Russia and other foreign actors 
from trying to inflame racial and political tensions through social 
media?
    Answer. The public conversation occurring on Twitter is never more 
important than during elections, the cornerstone of democracy. Any 
attempts to undermine the integrity of our service is antithetical to 
our fundamental values and undermines the core tenets of freedom of 
expression.
    We remain vigilant about malicious foreign efforts to manipulate 
and divide people in the United States and throughout the world, 
including through the use of foreign disinformation campaigns that rely 
in certain instances upon the use of deepfakes. In April 2019, we 
issued a new Twitter policy regarding election integrity governing 
different categories of manipulative behavior and content related to 
elections. First, an individual cannot share false or misleading 
information about how to participate in an election. This includes but 
is not limited to misleading information about how to vote or register 
to vote, requirements for voting, including identification 
requirements, and the official announced date or time of an election. 
Second, an individual cannot share false or misleading information 
intended to intimidate or dissuade voters from participating in an 
election. This includes but is not limited to misleading claims that 
polling places are closed, that polling has ended, or other misleading 
information relating to votes not being counted.
    Third, we do not allow misleading claims about police or law 
enforcement activity related to polling places or elections, long 
lines, equipment problems, voting procedures or techniques that could 
dissuade voters from participating in an election, and threats 
regarding voting locations. Finally, we do not allow the creation of 
fake accounts which misrepresent their affiliation, or share content 
that falsely represents its affiliation to a candidate, elected 
official, political party, electoral authority, or government entity.
    If we see the use of any manipulated content to spread 
misinformation in violation of our policies governing election 
integrity, we will remove that content.
    Additionally, we make available a unique comprehensive archive of 
removed Tweets and media associated with suspected state-backed 
information operations. Our industry peers, academics and policymakers 
can leverage the range of signals we publish including links, media, 
and account indicators. The data sets we have published so far include 
more than 30 million Tweets and more than one terabyte of media.
    Further, information sharing and collaboration are critical to 
Twitter's success in preventing hostile foreign actors from disrupting 
meaningful political conversations on the service. We have well-
established relationships with law enforcement agencies active in this 
arena, including the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation's Foreign 
Influence Task Force and the U.S. Department of Homeland Security's 
Election Security Task Force. We look forward to continued cooperation 
with federal, state, and local government agencies on election 
integrity issues because in certain circumstances only they have access 
to information critical to our joint efforts to stop bad faith actors.
    On Election Day in the 2018 U.S. midterms, Twitter participated 
virtually in an operations center convened by the U.S. Department of 
Homeland Security. The operations center also convened officials from 
the U.S. Department of Justice, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, 
and the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, in addition to 
federal, state, local, and private sector partners. In the lead up to 
Election Day, and throughout the course of the day itself, Twitter 
remained in constant contact with officials throughout all levels of 
government. We plan to do the same in the 2020 U.S. election period.
    We also worked in close collaboration with the National Association 
of Secretaries of State (NASS) and the National Association of State 
Election Directors (NASED). Founded in 1904, NASS is the Nation's 
oldest, nonpartisan professional organization for public officials, and 
is open to secretaries of states and lieutenant governors in the 50 
states, D.C. and territories. In February 2019, Twitter participated in 
a panel discussion convened by NASS on the Role of Social Media in 
Democracy and their New Voters Forum, broadcast on C-Span.

    Question 4. Regarding the shared industry database of hashes linked 
to content that promotes terrorism; I would like to understand the 
thresholds for including certain content in the database. Who makes the 
decision to include content in that database and how is that decision 
made? What percent of that database concerns white nationalist or other 
domestic extremist content?
    Answer. Collaboration with our industry peers and civil society is 
critically important to addressing common threats from terrorism 
globally. In June 2017, we launched the Global Internet Forum to 
Counter Terrorism (the ``GIFCT''), a partnership among Twitter, 
YouTube, Facebook, and Microsoft.
    The GIFCT facilitates, among other things: information sharing; 
technical cooperation; and, research collaboration, including with 
academic institutions. In September 2017, the members of the GIFCT 
announced a significant financial commitment to support research on 
terrorist abuse of the Internet and how governments, tech companies, 
and civil society can respond effectively. Our goal is to establish a 
network of experts that can develop platform-agnostic research 
questions and analysis that consider a range of geopolitical contexts.
    Technological collaboration is a key part of GIFCT's work. In the 
first two years of GIFCT, two projects have provided technical 
resources to support the work of members and smaller companies to 
remove terrorist content.
    As reported in GIFCT's first transparency report, published in July 
2019, the GIFCT Hash Sharing Consortium has reached over 200,000 unique 
pieces of terrorist content. Companies often have slightly different 
definitions on ``terrorism'' and ``terrorist content.'' The taxonomy 
includes the following labels that are applied to the content when a 
company ads hashes to the shared database.

   Imminent Credible Threat (ICT): A public posting of a 
        specific, imminent, credible threat of violence toward non-
        combatants and/or civilian infrastructure.

   Graphic Violence Against Defenseless People: The murder, 
        execution, rape, torture, or infliction of serious bodily harm 
        on defenseless people (prisoner exploitation, obvious non-
        combatants being targeted).

   Glorification of Terrorist Acts (GTA): Content that 
        glorifies, praises, condones, or celebrates attacks after the 
        fact.

   Recruitment and Instruction (R&I): Materials that seek to 
        recruit followers, give guidance, or instruct them 
        operationally.

   New Zealand Perpetrator Content: The GIFCT set a new 
        precedent in the wake of the New Zealand terrorist attack. Due 
        to the virality and cross-platform spread of the attacker's 
        manifesto and attack video, and because New Zealand authorities 
        deemed all manifesto and attack video content illegal, the 
        GIFCT created a crisis bank to mitigate the spread of this 
        content.

    The following shows the breakdown of how much content has been 
ingested into the shared database of hashes based on the above 
taxonomy.

   Imminent Credible Threat: 0.4 percent

   Graphic Violence Against Defenseless People: 4.8 percent

   Glorification of Terrorist Acts: 85.5 percent

   Radicalization, Recruitment, Instruction: 9.1 percent

   New Zealand Perpetrator Content: 0.6 percent

    More information can be found here: https://gifct.org/transparency/
    In addition to these efforts by the GIFCT, in 2018 Twitter began 
working with a small group of companies to test a new collaborative 
system. Because Twitter does not allow files other than photos or short 
videos to be uploaded, one of the behaviors we saw from those seeking 
to promote terrorism was to post links to other services where people 
could access files, longer videos, PDFs, and other materials. Our pilot 
system allows us to alert other companies when we removed an account or 
Tweet that linked to material that promoted terrorism hosted on their 
service. This information sharing ensures the hosting companies can 
monitor and track similar behavior, taking enforcement action pursuant 
with their individual policies. This is not a high-tech approach, but 
it is simple and effective and recognizes the resource constraints of 
smaller companies.
    Based on positive feedback, the partnership has now expanded to 12 
companies with which we have shared more than 12,000 unique URLs. Every 
time a piece of content is removed at source, it means any link to that 
source--wherever it is posted--will no longer be operational.
    We are eager to partner with additional companies to expand this 
project, and we look forward to building on our existing partnerships 
in the future.
                                 ______
                                 
    Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Jacky Rosen to 
                              Nick Pickles
    Question 1. The challenge for social media platforms prohibiting 
certain types of behavior on their sites is creating clear and concise 
rules for users to comply. Offensive conduct isn't a static issue, and 
as technology has evolved, so have our definitions of what constitutes 
abusive behavior such as cyberbullying and misinformation campaigns.

   Can you explain to us how your companies come up with rules 
        regarding hateful speech and how those rules have evolved? What 
        are your guidelines for determining when charged rhetoric 
        crosses the line into becoming hate speech? For example, how do 
        you determine if rhetoric is anti-Semitic?

   How closely do you work with outside groups, researchers, 
        and users to come up with definitions of what constitutes hate 
        and abusive speech and policies to deal with ambiguous cases? 
        For instance, have you worked with the Anti-Defamation League 
        or other groups combating hate when determining guidelines?

    Answer. We draft and enforce the Twitter Rules to keep people safe 
on our service, and to protect the health of the public conversation. 
The Twitter Rules apply to everyone. In general, we create our rules 
with a rigorous policy development process; it involves in-depth 
research, analysis of the behavior of individuals on Twitter, 
historical violation patterns, and immersion in academic material.
    We appreciate these issues are complex and we value the input of 
external voices in developing our approach. As part of our internal 
development process, we consult with a wide range of stakeholders and 
we focus on the risk of gaming, subverting, or otherwise abusing our 
policies and product changes. We supplement this work with 
conversations with outside experts and organizations where appropriate.
    For example, many scholars have examined the relationship between 
dehumanization and violence. In September 2018, we tried something new 
by asking the public for feedback on a policy before it became part of 
the Twitter Rules. Our goal was to test a new format for policy 
development whereby the individuals who use Twitter have a role in 
directly shaping our efforts to protect them. We wanted to expand our 
hateful conduct policy to include content that dehumanizes others based 
on their membership in an identifiable group, even when the material 
does not include a direct target.
    We asked for feedback to ensure we considered a wide range of 
perspectives and to hear directly from different communities and 
cultures who use Twitter around the globe. In two weeks, we received 
more than 8,000 responses from people located in more than 30 
countries.
    Following our review of public comments, in July 2019, we expanded 
our rules against hateful conduct to include language that dehumanizes 
others on the basis of religion.
    We also work with outside groups, including those represented on 
the Twitter Trust and Safety Council, of which the Anti-Defamation 
League is a member. These groups are able to provide input on a range 
of policy and product approaches, both as part of the council and in 
direct conversations with teams at Twitter.

    Question 2. With almost three and a half billion social media users 
worldwide--and one million users joining every day--social media 
platforms have turned to a mix of machine learning and human moderators 
to detect and take down hate speech, terrorist propaganda, cyber-
bullying, and disinformation. Machine learning can be a useful tool in 
identifying objectionable content quickly, preventing it from 
spreading. However, there are concerns about its ability to understand 
the context of text or images, and the length of time it takes to train 
systems with new data to recognize objectionable content.

   Can you give us an estimate of how many content moderation 
        decisions are made by your machine learning systems? And can 
        you provide an estimated error rate for content flagged by 
        machine learning?

   Are there instances where machine learning is more effective 
        in flagging certain content than others? Does the error rate 
        change significantly from one type of content to another?

    Answer. Twitter's philosophy is to take a behavior-led approach, 
utilizing a combination of machine learning and human review to 
prioritize reports and improve the health of the public conversation. 
That is to say, we increasingly look at how accounts behave before we 
look at the content they are posting. This is how we can scale our 
efforts globally and leverage technology even where the language used 
is highly context specific. Twitter employs extensive content detection 
technology to identify potentially abusive content on the service, 
along with allowing users to report content to us either as an 
individual or as a bystander.
    For abuse, this strategy has allowed us to take three times the 
amount of enforcement actions on abuse within 24 hours than this time 
last year. We now proactively surface over 50 percent of abusive 
content we remove using our technology compared to only 20 percent a 
year ago. This reduces the burden on individuals to report content to 
us. Since we started using machine learning three years ago to reduce 
the visibility on abusive content:

   80 percent of all replies that are removed were already less 
        visible;

   Abuse reports themselves have been reduced by 7.6 percent;

   The most visible replies receive 45 percent less abuse 
        reports;

   100,000 accounts were suspended for creating new accounts 
        after a previous suspension during January through March 2019--
        a 45 percent increase from the same time last year;

   60 percent faster response to appeals requests with our new 
        in-app appeal process;

   3 times more abusive accounts suspended within 24 hours 
        after a report compared to the same time last year; and

   2.5 times more private information removed with a new, 
        easier reporting process.

    Machine learning plays an important role across a multitude of our 
product surface areas. Making Twitter healthier also requires making 
the way we employ machine learning more fair, accountable, and 
transparent.
    In many areas, machine learning is not sufficiently accurate to 
utilize in content removal decisions. For example, machine learning is 
not well suited to address sarcasm, innuendo, satire, or distinguish 
news coverage from propaganda broadcasts. A human role in these content 
decisions is essential to protect vulnerable groups, public debate, and 
free expression.
    As machine learning evolves, there are some challenges that are 
more difficult than others. Often this is tied to the availability of 
training data for models. Rare events create fewer opportunities to 
obtain training data that hinder future efforts to identity similar 
incidents, while those that happen frequently offer greater data to 
train models. This is an area where further industry collaboration is 
essential, as the availability of training data is fundamental to the 
ability of companies to develop machine learning models that are better 
able to identify and remove different types of problematic content.
    We welcome efforts to increase collaboration in this area, both 
with industry and governments. Increased efforts to foster technical 
collaboration will enable us to build upon work already done, and 
policymakers can support these efforts with greater legal protections 
for companies sharing content of this nature.
                                 ______
                                 
 Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Shelley Moore Capito 
                            to Derek Slater
    Question 1. I represent a state that has one of--if not--the 
highest rates of drug overdoses deaths, the vast majority of which are 
due to opioids. I appreciate Google's recent announcement to launch new 
tools to help connect individuals recovering from opioid addiction with 
treatment resources. Does Google plan on doing similar initiatives to 
combat radicalization, like providing resources to mental health 
services?
    Answer. We hope that Google's growing, multi-faceted efforts to 
address the opioids epidemic can help West Virginia and families 
nationwide grapple with substance use issues. These efforts include 
prevention, like making it easier for people to find medication 
disposal sites in their communities, to the treatment resources you 
mentioned, and providing uplifting resources for people in long term 
recovery for substance abuse.
    Like substance use, mental health treatment generally is complex 
and stigmatized, with 50 percent of individuals not receiving needed 
treatment for depression and 1 in 5 not receiving needed treatment for 
PTSD. In partnership with the National Alliance on Mental Illness 
(NAMI), Google enabled people searching for information on mental 
health conditions including depression and PTSD to understand the 
likelihood of having these conditions by taking brief, clinically 
validated surveys (PHQ-9 for depression and PC-PTSC-5 for PTSD). We 
also help users to find resources to take action toward recovery 
including directing them to instant access to the National Suicide 
Hotline by phone or chat if they are having suicidal thoughts.

    Question 2. This Committee has held a number of hearings on the 
rise and importance of artificial intelligence (AI) in today's digital 
economy. AI has been invaluable in collecting and sorting massive 
amounts of data. In the case of today's hearing, AI has become critical 
in order to identify radicalization and terrorist threats. Each company 
has identified key tools each company uses in identifying bad actors on 
your platforms, but machine learning being one of the most critical. 
What factors are given priority when determining radicalized or 
terrorist content?
    a. You also mention the importance of human expertise in 
determining more nuanced cases. When does human expertise step in after 
AI has identified or flags content?

    b. After content has been flagged for law enforcement involvement, 
what is the process that takes place afterward? Does that content get 
sent to the FBI and then disseminated to state law enforcement?
    Answer. We use a mix of people and technology to address terrorist 
and violent extremist content on our platforms. We apply our most 
advanced machine learning research to train new ``content classifiers'' 
to help us more quickly identify and remove extremist and terrorism-
related content. This can be challenging: a video of a terrorist attack 
may be informative reporting by a news agency, or glorification of 
violence if uploaded in a different context by a different user. Human 
reviewers play a key role in making nuanced decisions about the line 
between violent propaganda and newsworthy speech. Our efforts to 
address this content have also included consultation with dozens of 
experts in subjects like terrorism, violent extremism, civil rights, 
and free speech.
    The Stored Communications Act allows Google and other service 
providers to voluntarily disclose user data to governmental entities in 
emergency circumstances where the provider has a good faith belief that 
disclosing the information will prevent loss of life or serious 
physical injury to a person. When we have a good faith belief that 
there is a threat to life or serious bodily harm made on our platform 
in the United States, the Google CyberCrime Investigation Group (CCIG) 
will report it to the Northern California Regional Intelligence Center 
(NCRIC). In turn, NCRIC quickly gets the report into the hands of 
officers to respond. Our team is staffed on a 24/7/365 basis to respond 
to these emergency disclosure requests (EDRs).
    In other cases, law enforcement agencies at the Federal and state 
levels make emergency requests to Google for user data in situations 
involving danger of death or serious physical injury to any person. As 
illustrated in our transparency report covering government requests for 
user data, the number of EDRs submitted from agencies in the U.S. 
almost doubled from 2017 to 2018. We have grown our teams to 
accommodate this growing volume and to ensure we can quickly respond to 
emergency situations that implicate public safety.
                                 ______
                                 
 Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Richard Blumenthal to 
                              Derek Slater
NO HATE Act and Reporting
    I have introduced legislation, the Jabara-Heyer NO HATE Act, which 
would help states implement and train officers in the National 
Incident-Based Reporting Systems. The NO HATE Act would also provide 
grants to states to better address hate crimes by training law 
enforcement, establish specialized units, create community relations 
programs, and run hate crime hotlines.

    Question 1. Do you support the Jabara-Heyer NO HATE Act? I 
understand that it has taken some time for Google and Facebook to 
establish reliable and timely channels to report threats made on your 
platform to the proper authorities. Mr. Slater, you testified that you 
now have a strong relationship with the Northern California Regional 
Intelligence Center, who has been effective at quickly getting reports 
of threats into the right hands.

    Question 2. Would you support adding measures to the Jabara-Heyer 
NO HATE Act to expand the NCRIC model of integrated threat-reporting 
nationwide?

    Question 3. What steps would improve communications channels with 
law enforcement to make sure the right information gets into the right 
hands quickly?
    Answer. Addressing questions 1-3: We appreciate your work in this 
area and share your interest in getting threat information to law 
enforcement so they can take immediate action. We have worked with law 
enforcement to create efficient processes with NCRIC and think we have 
all made important strides together. While we have not yet taken a 
position the Jabara-Heyer NO HATE Act, we support the intent and we are 
interested in learning more about how it could be amended to include an 
expansion of the NCRIC model. Google is supportive of efforts to expand 
the approach spearheaded by NCRIC to allow for greater geographic 
coverage, handle overflow work, and to make the process more robust. It 
is also important that NCRIC continue to receive the necessary funding 
to continue building its capacity and effectiveness.
Amplification of 8Chan and Other Hate Sites
    We have seen over this year that fringe sites are a breeding ground 
for racist and violent hate communities. However, extremists then use 
mainstream platforms to recruit and amplify their hate and ideologies 
to a larger audience. In particular, the site 8chan has had a repeated 
role in multiple mass shootings this year. The perpetrators of 
Christchurch mosque shootings, Poway synagogue shooting, and El Paso 
massacre each posted manifestos to 8chan before their attacks. It is 
also sites such as 8chan that facilitate campaigns of harassment and 
terrorism that target the victims of mass shootings, such as the Sandy 
Hook families. 8chan is currently offline after webhosting providers 
finally cut their ties after the El Paso shootings. However, 8chan's 
owner has said that he plans to revive the site as soon as this week.

    Question 4. Has your company taken any steps to limit the spread of 
8chan content, including the communities that hosted the manifestos of 
shooters, on your platforms?

    Question 5. Please describe the specific steps you to restrict the 
amplification of 8chan and other violent sites on your platforms, 
including what sites you have taken action to restrict.
    Answer. Answering questions 4-5: We take a number of steps to 
address harmful content across our platforms, regardless of the source, 
including the following:

        Removing content from hosted platforms: Hate speech is not 
        allowed on YouTube and other Google hosted platforms, and we 
        are bringing significant attention to detection and removal of 
        hateful content on our platforms. We have a number of policies 
        that work together to disallow hateful content--our hate speech 
        policy, our harassment policy which disallows malicious attacks 
        against individuals, and our general policy that disallows 
        incitement to violence. Our policies would be applicable to 
        ``manifestos'' from those who commit violent acts.

        Removing financial incentives: In addition, our longstanding 
        policies prevent ads from running on violative content, 
        including hate speech. On YouTube, channels that have shown a 
        history of brushing up against our hate speech policies (even 
        if they haven't crossed the line), will be suspended from our 
        YouTube Partner program.

        Reducing recommendations of borderline content: Besides removal 
        of content on YouTube, we also take other steps to curb 
        potentially harmful content. Several months ago, we began 
        reducing visibility of borderline content (which comes close to 
        but doesn't quite violate our rules) or content that can 
        misinform users in harmful ways. This will be a gradual change, 
        but this approach is already starting to bear fruit. In the 
        U.S. we've seen a 50 percent drop of views from recommendations 
        to this type of content, meaning quality content has more of a 
        chance to shine.
COPPA Settlement and Children's Privacy
    Question 6. How will Google implement its new promises under its 
COPPA-related consent decree regarding data collection on content in 
which it has a direct financial and curatorial relationship, including 
Google Preferred?
    Answer. We are making a number of changes to how we treat data on 
children's content on YouTube to address the concerns reflected in the 
FTC's investigation.
    In order to identify this category of content, we will be requiring 
creators to tell us when their content is made for kids. We will also 
use machine learning to find videos that clearly target young 
audiences, for example those that have an emphasis on kids characters, 
themes, toys, or games and use it as a signal that will help us define 
the child directed content at YouTube.
    We will treat data from anyone watching made for kids content on 
YouTube as coming from a child, regardless of the age of the user. This 
means that we will limit data collection and use on videos made for 
kids only to what is needed to support the operation of the service. We 
will stop serving personalized ads on this content entirely, and some 
features will no longer be available on this type of content, like 
comments and notifications.
    Advertising inventory on content made for kids will be available 
for certain reservation ad buys, such as custom packs and sponsorships, 
but we currently don't have plans to include it in reservation buys 
like the Google Preferred Lineup and Breakout Video packages.

    Question 7[1]. When Google says it will only collect data on videos 
made for kids for ``what is needed to support the operation of the 
service,'' what specifically will it gather and how will it be used?
    Answer. On content that is identified as made for kids, we are 
putting in place limitations on the data we collect and use as 
described above. This means:

   Limiting the collection of personal information like name, 
        address, or contact information. We will collect user activity 
        information such as when users watch a video or click on an 
        advertisement, and information about their device such as IP 
        address.

   Disabling features including comments, sharing features, 
        notification requests, and add-to-playlist features. Actions 
        such as Subscribe or Like may still be enabled for users 
        logged-in to their Google accounts, but would have limited 
        functionality.

   Prohibiting the serving of personalized advertising or 
        remarketing ads.

    Using data only to support the operation of the service, which 
includes: performing actions you request (e.g., playing a video); 
respecting your settings (e.g., preferred language/country which allows 
us to surface e.g., videos in French for users in France); preventing 
fraud and abuse; personalizing users' experience on YouTube (e.g., 
recommending relevant content based on watch history), depending on 
their account settings; and serving contextual advertisements.

    Question 7[2]. What role, if any, will the Google Marketing 
Platform play in this regard?
    Answer. The changes that we're implementing to how we collect and 
use data on content identified as made for kids, as described above, 
will apply across our ad products that may be used to serve advertising 
on YouTube.

    Question 8. Will Google expand its new kid privacy safeguards to 
its other child directed services, such as the Play Store?
    Answer. We have already made a number of improvements this year as 
part of the revamp of the Designed for Families Program, which launched 
in May 2019. These policy changes build on our existing efforts to help 
ensure that apps for children have appropriate content, show suitable 
ads, and handle personally identifiable information correctly; they 
also reduce the chance that apps not intended for children could 
unintentionally attract them. Developers who have children as part of 
their target audience must meet stringent policy requirements in their 
apps concerning both content safety, ads appropriateness, and privacy 
protections. We will also be double checking apps to make sure that 
they are not seeking to attract children but attempting to avoid these 
requirements. We take action when we identify developers who do not 
fulfill these policy requirements and remove their content from the 
Play store when appropriate.

    Question 9. Will the new fund for children's content creators 
principally fund non-commercial and ad free content aimed for kids, 
families and for education?
    Answer. We are currently determining the criteria for distributing 
the funds, working with children's media experts to ensure we are 
funding high-quality content with a global reach. We will look to fund 
enriching content similar to the type of content we featured in our 
Creating for Families Field Guide. When complete, the content will 
appear on our existing platforms, which are supported through 
contextual advertising so that they can remain free and accessible for 
all families, regardless of ability to pay.

    Question 10. How will Google deal with influencer and unboxing 
videos aimed at children?
    Answer. We do not currently allow paid promotional content on 
YouTube Kids. See here and here for more details because there is not 
yet an industry consensus on what an appropriate disclosure for such an 
audience would require. On the main YouTube service, however, which is 
intended for a wider audience, paid promotional videos are generally 
permitted. Such promotions must be disclosed as paid promotions and 
must abide by all YouTube ads policies (including restrictions around 
targeting kids under 13). These policies are outlined in our Help 
Center here. We are also seeking guidance among industry partners and 
regulators to determine what an appropriate disclosure for kid 
appealing content might look like in this context.
    There is a wide range of content that is sometimes called 
`unboxing'--ranging from videos of kids playing with toys (or indeed 
even cardboard boxes, making them into pirate ships or castles) to an 
adult showing off a Chewbacca mask. Therefore not all unboxing is 
necessarily commercial, not all of it is compensated, and the audiences 
are diverse. When creators of unboxing videos are compensated in any 
way by an advertiser, Google would consider the video to be a paid 
promotion and the creator would be required to mark it as such under 
our policies. Unboxing videos that are not motivated by any 
consideration or connection with an advertiser are not commercial, and 
are outside of the scope of such policies. We are currently working 
with experts to understand how to treat this content and whether we 
need to update our policies or practices.

    Question 11. Are the YouTube changes all global?
    Answer. Yes, the changes we are making consistent with the FTC 
settlement will be implemented globally.
Testing of Consumer Platforms
    Question 12. Please describe the process you use to test and 
evaluate new consumer facing products, including algorithms designed to 
promote forms of engagement. What methods are employed to assess the 
impact of these products on individuals and groups, both for an 
immediate and medium term response?
    Answer. Google's evaluation and testing processes reflect the 
diversity of our consumer-facing products and offerings, ranging from 
laptops to operating systems or search engines-typically involving 
multiple rounds of testing, experiments, and reviews with product, 
engineering, trust-and-safety, legal, policy, and privacy experts. 
Those reviews are designed to verify that the product functions as 
expected, to explore unintended consequences, and to address possible 
risks.
    For instance, to help ensure Search algorithms meet high standards 
of relevance and quality, we have a rigorous process that involves both 
live tests and thousands of trained external Search Quality Raters from 
around the world. Search Quality Raters follow strict guidelines that 
define our goals for Search algorithms and are publicly available for 
anyone to see. The ratings provided by Search Quality Raters help us 
benchmark the quality of our results so that we can meet a high bar for 
users of Google Search all around the world.
    In addition to the Search quality tests, we conduct live traffic 
experiments to see how real people interact with a feature, before 
launching it to everyone. Results from these experiments undergo a 
review by experienced engineers and search analysts, as well as other 
legal and privacy experts, who then determine whether the change is 
approved to launch. In 2018, we ran over 654,680 experiments, with 
trained external Search Raters and live tests, resulting in more than 
3,234 improvements to Search. For more information on this process and 
our methods, please refer to www.google.com/search/howsearchworks.
    YouTube also conducts robust evaluation and testing processes ahead 
of launching new features or policies. Given our scale, it's important 
that we roll out new offerings and product changes incrementally so we 
can monitor performance and feedback from users. Creators can also 
submit feedback directly through YouTube Studio.
    YouTube's development of platform policies provides another 
example. At YouTube, we have developed robust ``Community Guidelines'' 
that set the rules of the road for what we don't allow. We are 
constantly evaluating these policies and their enforcement, 
incorporating feedback from experts and trends we see on the platform; 
we made 30 updates to our policies in the last year alone. For 
instance, we strengthened our hate speech policy in June by 
specifically prohibiting videos alleging that a group is superior in 
order to justify discrimination, segregation or exclusion based on 
qualities like age, gender, race, caste, religion, sexual orientation 
or veteran status. When evaluating our approach towards hateful content 
we consulted with dozens of experts in subjects like violent extremism, 
civil rights, and free speech.
    In addition to our teams focused on policy development and 
enforcement, we've also established an intel desk to help us detect 
emerging trends in how people and organizations may try to misuse our 
platform. It identifies new trends in harmful content by synthesizing 
leads from third party intel vendors, internal trend data, social 
listening, and other relevant inputs.

    Question 13. Do you ever identify unintended consequences of such 
proposed products and then revise them or decide not to launch?
    Answer. Yes. Where our reviews identify significant unintended 
consequences for users or society that we cannot adequately resolve in 
time for our planned launch date, we may postpone temporarily or 
indefinitely. This is a normal part of doing business for each of the 
products and services that we operate.

    Question 14. What testing and measurement methodologies are 
routinely used and how are the product evaluation teams selected? 
Please submit any criteria you have developed for new or revised data 
driven products or applications, including their intended impact, 
demographic reach, and revenue potential.
    Answer. Our evaluation criteria for new products or services are a 
direct function of their intended goals. For instance, our hardware 
product launch process will involve in-depth reviews for the quality, 
durability, and resilience of each individual component, in line with 
the best industry standards, whereas the same processes would not make 
sense for software, storage, or computing services. When it comes to 
our ranking algorithms, as mentioned above, we use a number of methods 
including side-by-side experiments with trained raters and live 
experiments to test whether a given change to our products represents a 
tangible improvement for our users. Our criteria are both quantitative 
and qualitative, aimed at measuring not just the changes in user 
behavior, but also whether a given change advances the goals outlined 
in our Search Quality Rater Guidelines.
                                 ______
                                 
     Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Tom Udall to 
                              Derek Slater
    Question 1. We cannot talk about mass violence without talking 
about the social and political climate that is dividing America. Most 
recently, content that demonizes and spreads hate against immigrant 
communities is proliferating across social media. This content is too 
often indistinguishable from social media posts from some elected 
representatives. How does your company define hate speech? And how do 
you address situations when content that meets that definition comes 
from a political leader?
    Answer. Hate speech is not allowed on YouTube and other Google 
hosted platforms, and we are bringing significant attention to 
detection and removal of hateful content on our platforms. We enforce 
those policies regardless of a speaker's political persuasion.
    We have a number of policies that work together to disallow hateful 
content--our hate speech policy, our harassment policy which disallows 
malicious attacks against individuals, and our general policy that 
disallows incitement to violence. For instance, our hate speech policy 
on YouTube specifically prohibits: ``Content that encourages or 
glorifies violence against individuals or groups, or whose primary 
purpose is to incite hate against individual or group based on 
attributes including age, ethnicity, disability, gender, nationality, 
race, immigration status, religion, sex, sexual orientation, and 
veteran status.'' It's important to note that YouTube takes action 
against hateful content, not based on speakers.
    We don't allow content that dehumanizes individuals or groups with 
these attributes, claims they are physically or mentally inferior, or 
praises or glorifies violence against them. We also don't allow use of 
stereotypes that incite or promote hatred based on these attributes, or 
racial, ethnic, religious, or other slurs where the primary purpose is 
to promote hatred. Our policy prohibits content that alleges the 
superiority of a group over those with any of the attributes noted 
above to justify violence, discrimination, segregation, or exclusion. 
We also do not allow content that denies that a well-documented, 
violent event took place.
    In enforcing our hate speech policy, we consider the purpose of the 
video. If users are posting educational, documentary, scientific, or 
artistic content related to hate speech, we encourage them to be 
mindful to provide enough information so viewers understand the 
context, such as through an introduction, voiceover commentary, or text 
overlays, as well as through a clear title and description. We give 
users tips and tools for adding context on YouTube.

    Question 2. Knowing that the problem of extremism and mass violence 
extends beyond the screen, I would like you to describe your 
partnerships with communities and organizations around the country to 
fight against extremism and hate. What are you doing to promote their 
voices on your platforms? And what makes them effective?
    Answer. In 2016, we launched YouTube Creators for Change, an 
initiative dedicated to amplifying the voices of role models who are 
tackling difficult social issues with their channels. From combating 
hate speech, to countering xenophobia and extremism, to simply making 
the case for greater tolerance and empathy toward others, these 
creators are helping to foster productive conversations around tough 
issues and make a positive impact on the world.
    As part of their commitment to the program, Creators for Change 
Ambassadors and Fellows receive mentorship and promotional support to 
aid the creation of their Impact Projects--films that tackle a wide 
range of topics, from self-acceptance and showing kindness to others, 
to celebrating cultures and advocating for global empathy.
    Creators for Change is a global program that thrives through its 
many local chapters. From providing education on the dangers of fake 
news, to helping create safe spaces for making content that addresses 
hate speech, these chapters empower thousands of young people to drive 
positive social change across Europe, the Middle East and the Asia-
Pacific region.
    We have produced annual reports detailing information about the 
Creator Ambassadors and the billions of views their content has 
generated, see https://www.youtube.com/creators-for-change/.
    In addition, because technology alone is not a silver bullet, we 
have greatly increased the number of independent experts in YouTube's 
Trusted Flagger program. Machines can help identify problematic videos, 
but human experts still play a role in nuanced decisions about the line 
between violent propaganda and religious or newsworthy speech. While 
many user flags can be inaccurate, Trusted Flagger reports are accurate 
over 90 percent of the time and help us scale our efforts and identify 
emerging areas of concern. We will expand this program by adding 50 
expert NGOs to the 63 organizations who are already part of the 
program, and we will support them with operational grants. This allows 
us to benefit from the expertise of specialized organizations working 
on issues like hate speech, self-harm, and terrorism. We will also 
expand our work with counter-extremist groups to help identify content 
that may be being used to radicalize and recruit extremists.
    Finally, we would also note that Jigsaw, a project of Google's 
parent company Alphabet, created the Redirect Method--a way to use 
AdWords targeting tools and curated YouTube videos uploaded by people 
all around the world to confront online radicalization. For example, it 
focuses on the slice of ISIS' audience that is most susceptible to its 
messaging, and redirects them towards curated YouTube videos debunking 
ISIS recruiting themes. This open methodology was developed from 
interviews with ISIS defectors, respects users' privacy and can be 
deployed to tackle other types of violent recruiting discourses online.

    Question 3. We are entering another election year and we know that 
foreign actors have amplified divisive rhetoric on social media and, in 
some cases, orchestrated actual protests. What specific actions are you 
taking to prepare for 2020 to prevent Russia and other foreign actors 
from trying to inflame racial and political tensions through social 
media?
    Answer. Although we found limited activity on our platforms in 2016 
and during the 2018 midterms, we understand the existence of this 
threat, and take the integrity of our elections very seriously. We have 
a team dedicated to ensuring the integrity of election-related content 
and ads across our platforms, including combating potential foreign 
influence.
    We've taken various key steps to combat election interference. For 
example, we have policies that prohibit misrepresentation and other 
forms of abuse, and we have devoted significant resources to enforcing 
our policies, and we have conducted vulnerability testing across key 
products and made several changes to safeguard our products from being 
used to confuse voters, such as through manipulation of search features 
(e.g., WebAnswers, Knowledge Panels). We also worked closely with 
others in industry and government election integrity task forces to be 
able to identify threats and respond quickly.
    We are approaching the 2020 election with vigilance and commitment. 
We expect to once again establish a war room with dedicated full-time 
employees to provide 24/7 monitoring and rapid escalation of any issues 
in the days before and after the elections. We continue to provide 
regular updates on our work to that end.
    This is in addition to our broader efforts to ensure the integrity 
of our elections. For example, we've trained 1,000 campaign 
professionals last year about online security, and we've released 
``Protect Your Election,'' a suite of digital tools designed to help 
election websites and political campaigns protect themselves from 
digital attacks.

    Question 4. Regarding the shared industry database of hashes linked 
to content that promotes terrorism; I would like to understand the 
thresholds for including certain content in the database. Who makes the 
decision to include content in that database and how is that decision 
made? What percent of that database concerns white nationalist or other 
domestic extremist content?
    Answer. In working together to build technological solutions that 
will prevent and disrupt the spread of terrorist content online, the 
largest cross-platform advancement supported by the Global Internet 
Forum to Counter Terrorism (GIFCT) has been the creation of a Hash 
Sharing Consortium. The consortium shares ``hashes'' (or digital 
fingerprints) of known terrorist images and videos. The image or video 
is ``hashed'' in its raw form and is not linked to any source original 
platform or user data. Hashes appear as a numerical representation of 
the original content and can't be reverse engineered to create the 
image and/or video. A platform needs to find a match with a given hash 
on their platform in order to see what the hash corresponds with.
    It is up to each consortium member how they utilize the database 
and how they contribute to it, depending on their own terms of service, 
how their platform operates, and how they utilize technical and human 
capacities.
    Companies often have slightly different definitions for 
``terrorism'' and ``terrorist content''. For the purposes of the hash 
sharing database, and to find an agreed upon common ground, founding 
companies in 2017 decided to define terrorist content based on content 
relating to organizations on the UN Terrorist Sanctions lists. 
Companies also agreed upon a basic taxonomy around the type of content 
ingested relating to these listed organizations. The taxonomy includes 
labels that are applied to the content when a company adds hashes to 
the shared database.
    GIFCT released its first transparency report in 2019; it includes 
the specific taxonomy used by the Hash Sharing Consortium and the 
respective percentages of each category, available at: gifct.org/
transparency.
                                 ______
                                 
    Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Jacky Rosen to 
                              Derek Slater
    Question 1. The challenge for social media platforms prohibiting 
certain types of behavior on their sites is creating clear and concise 
rules for users to comply. Offensive conduct isn't a static issue, and 
as technology has evolved, so have our definitions of what constitutes 
abusive behavior such as cyberbullying and misinformation campaigns.

   Can you explain to us how your companies come up with rules 
        regarding hateful speech and how those rules have evolved? What 
        are your guidelines for determining when charged rhetoric 
        crosses the line into becoming hate speech? For example, how do 
        you determine if rhetoric is anti-Semitic?

    Answer. We are investing in the policies, resources and products 
needed to live up to our responsibility and protect the YouTube 
community from harmful content. Over the past few years, this work has 
focused on four pillars: removing violative content, raising up 
authoritative content, reducing the spread of borderline content and 
rewarding trusted creators. Thanks to these investments, videos that 
violate our policies are removed faster than ever and users are seeing 
less borderline content and harmful misinformation. As we do this, 
we're partnering closely with lawmakers and civil society around the 
globe to limit the spread of violent extremist content online.
    We review our policies on an ongoing basis to make sure we are 
drawing the line in the right place: in 2018 alone, we made more than 
30 policy updates. One of the most complex and constantly evolving 
areas we deal with is hate speech.
    YouTube has always had rules of the road, including a longstanding 
policy against hate speech, but we've been taking a close look at our 
approach towards hateful content in consultation with dozens of experts 
in subjects like violent extremism, supremacism, civil rights, and free 
speech. Based on those learnings, we made several updates.
    In June 2019, we updated YouTube's hate speech policy by 
specifically prohibiting videos alleging that a group is superior in 
order to justify discrimination, segregation or exclusion based on 
qualities like age, gender, race, caste, religion, sexual orientation 
or veteran status. This would include, for example, videos that promote 
or glorify Nazi ideology, which is inherently discriminatory. 
Additionally, we will remove content denying that well-documented 
violent events, like the Holocaust or the shooting at Sandy Hook 
Elementary, took place.
    Human reviewers remain essential to both removing content and 
training machine learning systems because human judgment is critical to 
making contextualized decisions on content. The total number of people 
across Google working to address content that might violate our 
policies is over 10,000. Our trust and safety teams manually review 
millions of videos, helping train our machine-learning technology to 
identify similar videos in the future.

   How closely do you work with outside groups, researchers, 
        and users to come up with definitions of what constitutes hate 
        and abusive speech and policies to deal with ambiguous cases? 
        For instance, have you worked with the Anti-Defamation League 
        or other groups combating hate when determining guidelines?

    Answer. Regarding the definition of hate speech, we operate in 190 
countries, and hate speech laws vary by country. We respect the law as 
required in each country, and will block illegal hate speech content in 
a given country to comply with its applicable local laws. In addition, 
our hate speech policy is part of the YouTube Community Guidelines, 
which we enforce globally. That policy prohibits content that promotes 
violence against individuals or groups based on certain attributes, 
such as race, religion, disability, gender, age, or veteran status. We 
enforce those policies regardless of a speaker's political persuasion.
    The YouTube Trusted Flagger program is an important part of our 
work with external experts. The program was developed by YouTube to 
help provide robust tools for individuals, government agencies, and 
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) that are particularly effective 
at notifying YouTube of content that violates our Community Guidelines. 
Trusted flaggers have expertise in at least one policy vertical, flag 
content frequently with a high rate of accuracy, and are open to 
ongoing discussion and feedback with YouTube about various content 
areas.
    We have made improvements to YouTube's flagging tools, based on 
feedback from our Trusted Flagger network. In addition to our bespoke 
tools for Trusted Flaggers, we designed a dashboard that allows any 
user to check the status of flags they have submitted. The dashboard 
tells users if the content they flagged is active, removed, or 
restricted.
    Consultation with external experts is a key aspect of how we 
develop our approach to tough issues and how we evaluate our guidelines 
and enforcement mechanisms.

    Question 2. With almost three and a half billion social media users 
worldwide--and one million users joining every day--social media 
platforms have turned to a mix of machine learning and human moderators 
to detect and take down hate speech, terrorist propaganda, cyber-
bullying, and disinformation. Machine learning can be a useful tool in 
identifying objectionable content quickly, preventing it from 
spreading. However, there are concerns about its ability to understand 
the context of text or images, and the length of time it takes to train 
systems with new data to recognize objectionable content.

   Can you give us an estimate of how many content moderation 
        decisions are made by your machine learning systems? And can 
        you provide an estimated error rate for content flagged by 
        machine learning?

   Are there instances where machine learning is more effective 
        in flagging certain content than others? Does the error rate 
        change significantly from one type of content to another?

    Answer. As you might imagine, it takes a combination of both 
machine learning and human review to effectively review content and we 
actively monitor the success of both efforts. With human review, we 
check to see what decisions are being made by reviewers and update our 
guidelines if they are not clear or not meeting expectations. And we 
are constantly working to improve machine learning.
    The profound impact of YouTube's updated hate speech policy update 
is already evident in the data released in YouTube's Q2-2019 
transparency report: the number of individual video removals for hate 
speech saw a 5x spike to over 100,000, the number of channel 
terminations for hate speech also saw a 5x spike to 17,000, and the 
total comment removals nearly doubled in Q2 to over 500 million due in 
part to a large increase in hate speech removals. And because of our 
ability to remove this content quickly, videos that violate our 
policies generate a fraction of a percent of the views on YouTube. For 
example, the nearly 30,000 videos we removed for hate speech over the 
last month generated just 3 percent of the views that knitting videos 
did over the same time period.
                                 ______
                                 
 Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Richard Blumenthal to 
                              George Selim
NO HATE Act and Reporting
    I have introduced legislation, the Jabara-Heyer NO HATE Act, which 
would help states implement and train officers in the National 
Incident-Based Reporting Systems. The NO HATE Act would also provide 
grants to states to better address hate crimes by training law 
enforcement, establish specialized units, create community relations 
programs, and run hate crime hotlines.

    Question 1. Do you support the Jabara-Heyer NO HATE Act?
    Answer. ADL strongly supports the Jabara-Heyer NO HATE Act.
    Since 1990, the FBI has been collecting and reporting hate crime 
data, required by the Hate Crime Statistics Act of 1990 (HCSA). While 
the FBI HCSA data provides the best national snapshot of bias-motivated 
criminal activity in America, it is clearly incomplete. For example, in 
2017, the most recent data available, only 2,040 of the 16,149 
reporting law enforcement agencies--less than 13 percent--reported one 
or more hate crimes to the FBI. The remaining 87 percent of 
participating agencies affirmatively reported zero hate crimes to the 
FBI, including 92 cities with populations over 100,000. And more than 
1,000 law enforcement agencies did not report any data to the FBI, 
including 9 cities over 100,000. The entire state of Mississippi 
reported one hate crime in 2017, Alabama reported 9, and Arkansas 
reported 7. By contrast, two cities that have focused on effective hate 
crime response, Boston and Seattle, reported 140 hate crimes and 234, 
respectively.
    Studies have shown that more comprehensive, complete hate crime 
reporting can deter hate violence.\1\ Better data will assist in proper 
allocation of police resources and personnel--preventing crimes and 
reassuring victims. And better data will advance police-community 
relations. Improved data collection will necessarily require outreach 
and expanded networking and communication with targeted communities, as 
well as more training for law enforcement personnel in how to identify, 
report, and respond to hate violence.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ See ``Investigation of Hate Crimes; Model Policy; Concepts & 
Issues Paper; Need to Know. . . .'' from the IACP Law Enforcement 
Policy Center, September 2016, https://www.the
iacp.org/sites/default/files/2018-08/HateCrimesBinder2016v2.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    I understand that it has taken some time for Google and Facebook to 
establish reliable and timely channels to report threats made on your 
platform to the proper authorities. Mr. Slater testified that Google 
now has a strong relationship with the Northern California Regional 
Intelligence Center, who has been effective at quickly getting reports 
of threats into the right hands.

    Question 2. Would you support adding measures to the Jabara-Heyer 
NO HATE Act to expand the NCRIC model of integrated threat reporting 
nationwide?
    Answer. While law enforcement collaboration should be part of any 
conversation on improving responsiveness to hate crimes, I am not 
prepared to comment specifically on the NCRIC model. Overall, it is 
important that the Jabara-Heyer NO HATE Act should remain focused on 
one thing--improving reported hate crime data. Threats may or may not 
be criminal activity.

    Question 3. What steps would improve communications channels with 
law enforcement to make sure the right information gets into the right 
hands quickly?
    Answer. Improving hate crime data requires at least two efforts--
law enforcement authorities ready and willing to collect the data, and 
members of the targeted communities ready and willing to contact the 
police to report that they have been the victims of bias-motivated 
violence. The Department of Justice should incentivize state and local 
law enforcement to more comprehensively collect and report hate crimes 
data to the FBI, with special attention devoted to large underreporting 
law enforcement agencies that either have not participated in the FBI 
HCSA program at all or have affirmatively and not credibly reported 
zero hate crimes.
    If marginalized or targeted community members--including 
immigrants, people with disabilities, LGBTQ community members, Muslims, 
Arabs, Middle Easterners, South Asians and people with limited language 
proficiency--cannot report, or do not feel safe reporting hate crimes, 
law enforcement cannot effectively address these crimes, thereby 
jeopardizing the safety of all. Such efforts could be supported through 
the promotion of model policies and best practices and the passage of 
legislation designed to improve hate crime data collection and 
reporting legislation, such as the Jabara-Heyer NO HATE Act.
    Incentives can encourage police departments to report their hate 
crime data, and help overcome negative publicity that can accompany 
hate crime reporting. Police departments need to have the support of 
the community when their hate crime numbers increase; an increase may 
well indicate improved police-community relations, increased trust in 
police, public confidence that they will respond seriously to hate 
crime reports.
    Lastly, law enforcement must be encouraged to create relationships 
with community members who may be privy to threat information.

    This past December, in Monroe, Washington, a clearly troubled young 
man made a series of anti-Semitic rants and violent posts online. He 
bragged about planning to ``shoot up an (expletive) school'' in a video 
while armed with an AR-15-style weapon, and on Facebook posted that he 
was ``shooting for 30 Jews.'' Fortunately, these posts came to the 
attention of the Anti-Defamation League, which was able to tip off the 
FBI. The ADL's vigilance prevented another Parkland or Tree of Life 
attack.
    Question 4. I take it that the ADL does not report every terrible 
or obscene comment on the Internet to the FBI. Can you tell me about 
the process and criteria that your organization uses to identify 
threats, such as in Monroe?
    Answer. Investigative researchers at ADL encounter hundreds, if not 
thousands, of posts daily by individuals who make extreme and 
threatening comments on various online platforms. When we find such 
threats, we delve deeper into that person's online footprint. If that 
person displays photos showing his/her weapons and expresses a desire 
to use those weapons against a community and we can identify either the 
person or where he/she lives, we will report that person's comments to 
law enforcement. In addition, if we see that this individual is citing 
literature that promotes violence or previous violent acts as 
inspiration, we are more likely to report the person. These individuals 
often post their comments online hoping to receive support and 
encouragement to carry out acts of violence. Individuals we report to 
law enforcement are not just talking about hating a group of people--
they want to take action. For example, we reported Dakota Reed in 
Washington State for making threats to carry out a mass killing of 
Jews, and also reported the comments of Corbin Kauffman of Leighton, 
Pennsylvania, in March 2019. In Kauffman's case, in addition to posting 
violent comments and pictures of weapons, he posted a photo of himself 
carrying out an act of anti-Semitic vandalism. Law enforcement was able 
to identify him because of the various clues we provided about his 
identity.
                                 ______
                                 
     Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Tom Udall to 
                              George Selim
    Question 1. Mr. Selim, in response to the recent spate of mass 
shootings, this administration has floated the dangerous idea of 
monitoring persons with mental illness to try to predict gun violence. 
This policy, however, would only serve to further stigmatize people 
with mental illness--who are more likely to be victims of crimes than 
perpetrators. It is also a disingenuous way of talking about gun 
violence without having to talk about guns.
    What do you think about this proposal? In addition, can you 
describe what indicators of mass violence or extremism actually look 
like, based on the best research?
    Answer. It is wrong to assert that people with mental health 
disabilities, including those with perceived mental health 
disabilities, are inherently dangerous and the cause of our Nation's 
gun violence problem or that targeting them will solve our country's 
gun violence problem is wrong. In fact, many studies have demonstrated 
that people with disabilities, including mental health disabilities, 
are far more likely to be victims of gun violence than perpetrators. 
Blaming persons with mental health disabilities is counterproductive, a 
distraction from the real problem, and can result in stigmatizing 
people with mental health disabilities and the disability community as 
a whole.
    There is no one path to extremism, and there are no specific 
indicators that can act as predictors of extremist actions. Some 
academic sources have explored whether a combination of factors may 
indicate an over-arching risk of radicalization, and I direct you to 
those sources, such as this NIJ overview: https://www.ncjrs.gov/
pdffiles1/nij/251789.pdf

    Question 2. You were the director of the Office for Community 
Partnerships, and led the Countering Violent Extremism Task Force under 
the Department of Homeland Security. These offices were responsible for 
providing grants to anti-extremist groups and combatting domestic 
terrorism through interagency partnerships. Unfortunately, it appears 
these offices have been gutted by the current administration. We cannot 
fight against white supremacy and violent domestic extremism without 
partnering with communities, civil society, and federal, state, and 
local governments.
    In your opinion, should funding be reinstated to support these 
initiatives, and why?
    Answer. Yes, funding should be reinstated and scaled much higher. 
In light of how domestic terrorism laws differ from those of 
international terrorism, there are fewer law enforcement resources at 
the government's disposal, and prevention therefore is a key 
undertaking for the government. However, in light of the current 
administration's inadequacies and singular focus on Islamist-motivated 
forms of extremism, entities outside government must take the lead in 
preventing extremist violence. A public-private effort--with Congress 
funding research universities, technology companies, non-profit expert 
organizations, and state and local government partners--could provide 
the critical boost that prevention efforts need while also avoiding 
misgivings many have about the implications of an overly-federalized 
effort.
                                 ______
                                 
    Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Jacky Rosen to 
                              George Selim
    As we discuss the spread of hate online, I want to turn our focus 
to combating anti-Semitism in the digital sphere. Last year we saw the 
deadliest attack on the Jewish community in American history, when 
eleven people were killed at the Tree of Life Synagogue in Pittsburgh. 
Perhaps unsurprisingly, the shooter was linked to numerous anti-Semitic 
postings on a fringe social networking site called Gab. And hours after 
a gunman opened fire at a synagogue in Poway, California, a violently 
anti-Semitic letter from the shooter appear on 8chan and Facebook, with 
links to the letter later showing up on Twitter and other social media 
sites, spreading his hateful ideas across the world.
    Mr. Selim, online forums such as 8chan and Gab do very little to 
police their site from hateful and violent speech.

    Question 1. What role do these sites play in perpetuating mass 
violence and domestic terrorism in our country, AND
    Answer. Fringe web communities play a critical role in the 
dissemination of hate and extremist content. Perhaps the most important 
contributor to the subculture of the alt right is the so-called 
``imageboard,'' a type of online discussion forum originally created to 
share images. One of the most important is 4chan, a 15-year-old 
imageboard whose influence extends far beyond the alt right, as a key 
source of Internet memes. Its/pol subforum is a dark place, an anarchic 
collection of posts that range from relatively innocuous to highly 
offensive.
    Over time, 4chan has become home to many racists and open white 
supremacists. Some of its imitators, such as 8chan, lean even more 
towards racism and white supremacy. Parts of Reddit, a popular website 
that contains a massive collection of subject-oriented discussion 
threads, also share the chan subculture, as do parts of Tumblr.
    In April 2019, ADL released a report, a collaboration between 
Network Contagion Research Institute and ADL's Center on Extremism 
(COE), analyzing the similar ideological motivations and online 
activity of the perpetrators of the Pittsburgh and Christchurch 
massacres. Both killers announced their violent plans to their 
preferred Internet forums, Gab and 8chan, and were consumed by the 
white supremacist conspiracy theory of ``white genocide,'' which is 
frequently referenced on both sites.
    Both Gab and 8chan are rife with white supremacist, hateful, anti-
Semitic bigotry. Image boards such as 4chan are totally anonymous, 
without user names, allowing participants to say or post whatever they 
want, no matter how offensive, without fear of being exposed. Many take 
full advantage to engage in some of the most crude and blatant 
offensive language online, taking aim at many targets. The chan 
subculture has a strong tendency to portray all such content as a joke, 
even when not intended to be, resulting in a strong ``jkbnr'' (``just 
kidding but not really'') atmosphere. The alt right has also absorbed 
an even darker aspect of chan subculture: online harassment campaigns 
against people who have angered them.

    Question 2. In the immediate aftermath of deadly attacks motivated 
by hate, how should mainstream social networks such as Facebook and 
Twitter interact with these fringe sites to stop the spread of 
manifestos, letters, and other hateful writings?
    Answer. While the most extreme forms of online content thrive on 
websites like 8chan, Gab, and 4chan, larger social media platforms like 
Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube need to remain vigilant. Extremists 
leverage larger mainstream platforms to ensure that the hateful 
philosophies that begin to germinate on message boards like Gab and 
8chan find a new and much larger audience. Twitter's 300 million users 
and Facebook's 2.4 billion dwarf the hundreds of thousands of users on 
8chan and Gab. Extremists make use of mainstream platforms in specific 
and strategic ways to exponentially increase their audience while 
avoiding content moderation activity that Facebook and Twitter use to 
remove hateful content. These include creating private pages and 
events, sharing links that directly lead users to extreme content on 
websites like 8chan, as well as using coded language called dog 
whistles to imply and spread hateful ideology.
    To address this, mainstream platforms should limit the ways they 
are spreading hateful messages from smaller platforms. Fringe platforms 
like Gab and 8chan openly cater to users interested in spreading hate 
and conspiracies, and a considerable amount of their content would 
violate mainstream platforms' terms of service. As a result, mainstream 
platforms must aim to decrease cross-users' ability to recruit and 
spread hate and should increase the friction for users between their 
platforms and fringe platforms.
    Beyond their community guidelines and content moderation policies, 
features available on social media platforms need to be designed with 
anti-hate principles in mind. Companies need to conduct a thoughtful 
design process that puts their users first and incorporates society's 
concerns before, and not after, tragedy strikes. Today, the most 
popular method of developing technology tools is through a Software 
Prototyping approach: an industry-wide standard that prompts companies 
to quickly release a product or feature and iterate on it over time. 
This approach completely devalues the impact of unintended design 
consequences. For example, the Christchurch shooter used Facebook's 
livestreaming feature to share his attack with the world. The feature 
could have been designed to limit or lock audiences for new or first-
time streamers or prevent easy recording of the video.

    Question 3. Earlier this year, ADL's Center on Technology and 
Society called on technology companies, including several of those 
testifying here before us, to release ``transparency reports'' 
providing details on how they define and identify hate speech, how they 
moderate hateful content, and the efficacy of these techniques.
       Mr. Selim, can you discuss why such reports are useful?
    Answer. Knowledge on the efficacy of platforms' content moderation 
efforts at dealing with the problem of white supremacist activity 
remains extremely limited. Meaningful transparency will allow 
stakeholders to answer questions such as: ``How significant is the 
problem of white supremacy on this platform?'' ``Is this platform safe 
for people who belong to my community?'' ``Have the actions taken by 
this tech company to improve the problem of hate and extremism on their 
platform had the desired impact?''
    We can conduct external research to evaluate their efforts, but 
companies often do not share user data, limiting opportunities to 
collect and use data for research. Alternatively, we can review 
transparency reports on content moderation efforts published by 
technology companies, but these too offer very limited information.
    Mainstream social media platforms have a few potentially relevant 
metrics to the issue of extremism, especially white supremacist 
extremism, that they share in their regular transparency reports. 
Though each platform provides its own metrics on extremist activity, 
the metrics published are limited across the board, they are self-
reported by the companies, and we have no real way of knowing what 
content has been put into which category outside of the brief 
descriptions given by the platforms as part of their reporting.
    In order to truly assess the problem of hate on social platforms, 
technology companies must provide meaningful transparency with metrics 
that are agreed upon and verified by trusted third parties and that 
give actionable information to users, civil society, government and 
other stakeholders. Until technology platforms are willing to actively 
engage external parties and meaningfully address their concerns through 
greater transparency efforts, our ability to understand the extent of 
the problem of hate and extremism online, or how to meaningfully and 
systematically address it, will be extremely limited.

   Have such reports been released?
    Answer. Mainstream social media platforms publish transparency 
reports. These include Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube.
    If we look at the published metrics characterized as being related 
to terrorism (Facebook reported 6.4 million pieces of content related 
to terrorist propaganda removed from January to March 2019), this may 
seem relevant. However, typically, social platform platforms define 
terrorism in terms of Al Qaeda and ISIS-related activity and do not 
include white supremacist violence or activity as part of the terrorism 
classification. White supremacist extremist content could be 
categorized as hate speech or violent content on a platform, but at the 
same time, so could a wide variety of other types of content not 
associated with extremism or white supremacy.
    Moreover, when Facebook claims in their transparency report that 
they took action on four million pieces of hate speech from January to 
March 2019, we still have no sense of how that compares to the level of 
hate speech reported to them, what communities are impacted by those 
pieces of content or whether any of that content is connected with 
extremist activity on their platform.
    YouTube provides more granularity, sharing a number of different 
categories of content reported by users as well as the amount of 
content in each category that YouTube actioned. That being said, the 
names of the categories actioned by YouTube differs from those reported 
by users, making a comparison between what is reported and actioned 
impossible, and providing in the end the same level of opaqueness as 
Facebook's report.
    Twitter's transparency report on the other hand provides both the 
users reported to the platform and users actioned by the platform in 
identical categories, but does not provide any information on the 
amount of content reported versus amount actioned, making the scale of 
their activity similarly opaque.
    With almost three and a half billion social media users worldwide--
and one million users joining every day--social media platforms have 
turned to a mix of machine learning and human moderators to detect and 
take down hate speech, terrorist propaganda, cyber-bullying, and 
disinformation. Machine learning can be a useful tool in identifying 
objectionable content quickly, preventing it from spreading. However, 
there are concerns about its ability to understand the context of text 
or images, and the length of time it takes to train systems with new 
data to recognize objectionable content.

    Question 3. Mr. Selim, earlier this year the ADL announced a 
partnership with the Network Contagion Research Institute (NCRI) to 
research how extremism and hate speech spread on social media. NCRI 
uses machine learning to expose hate on digital platforms. Can you talk 
tell us about your findings?
    Answer. On October 27, 2018, Robert Bowers perpetrated the 
deadliest attack against Jews in American history when he stormed a 
Pittsburgh synagogue armed with an assault rifle and three handguns. 
Shouting ``All Jews must die,'' Bowers killed eleven people in their 
place of worship. Within months, Brenton Tarrant perpetrated the 
deadliest attack against Muslims in New Zealand's history when he 
slaughtered 50 people gathered for prayer at two mosques. In the wake 
of these horrific crimes, Jewish and Muslim communities worldwide and 
concerned citizens across the globe began searching for clues about 
attacks that seemed to come out of nowhere.
    In hindsight, though, these killings should not have been 
surprising. Both attackers were enmeshed in online communities that 
exposed them to content designed to make them hateful and potentially 
violent. Bowers was a member of a fringe online community called Gab, 
which, like similar online forums, is a bastion of hatred and bigotry. 
Gab has seen a surge in racist and anti-Semitic postings since the 2016 
presidential election. Tarrant, too, was part of a fringe online 
community called 8chan, one of the most notoriously hateful online 
communities on the internet.
    Platforms like these force us to reassess our understanding of how 
violence may be inspired by such hateful echo chambers. Even more 
broadly, as we have recently reported, mainstream platforms can 
sometimes push such individuals from an open community, such as 
Twitter, into fringe environments like Gab that foster acceptability of 
dangerous views.
    In September 2018, the Network Contagion Research Institute and its 
partners published a study, also detailed in a Washington Post article, 
which indicates that the state of online echo chambers of hate is far 
worse than many may imagine. Analyzing more than 100 million comments 
and tens of millions of images posted between July 2016 and January 
2018 to Gab and 4chan's ``politically incorrect'' message board (/pol/
), the NCRI performed the largest quantitative study to date regarding 
the rise of anti-Semitism and white nationalism on these popular white 
supremacist web communities. The study shows that anti-Semitic slurs 
and content doubled on these platforms after the election of President 
Donald Trump. During the same timeframe, these web communities also 
showed a dramatic surge in the expression of racism, including a 
substantial increase in the use of the n-word slur.
    NCRI's research also shows that these web communities influence the 
spread of hateful memes and images to more mainstream networks like 
Twitter and Reddit. This research (along with other studies) shows an 
uptick in hateful rhetoric on fringe web communities in the wake of 
significant political events or highly publicized extremist violence. 
Relatedly, some studies have similarly demonstrated that ethnic hate 
expressed on social media can cause surges in real-life hate crimes. 
The implications of this online-offline dynamic are highly concerning.
    On Gab, Bowers demonstrated how online propaganda can feed acts of 
violent terror. On 8chan, Tarrant showed how violent terror can itself 
create online propaganda. In both cases, the shooters strongly signaled 
back to their fringe web communities with their criminal acts, as 
though they were including them as knowing co-conspirators. In both 
cases, the participation of these fringe web communities proves to be 
key to the scope, sensationalism, and ideological thrust of the act. 
Moreover, both shooters claim the same twisted notion of ``white 
genocide''--or the imminent destruction of the white race by Jews and 
people of color--as the motive behind their terrorist acts, suggesting 
a shared ideological motivation. In fringe online communities, many 
members indoctrinate other users based on the conspiracy propaganda of 
a ``white genocide'' not online violent extremists of other ideologies 
spreading a grievance used to justify their malign views.
    The evidence overwhelmingly suggests that such platforms can serve 
to spread modern violent extremism in ways that could not have been 
predicted from the early days of social media. Gab and 8chan fan the 
flames of bigotry and hatred and organize violent fantasies in online 
communities even as they fuel them in the real world.
    There is no telling who else on Gab or 8chan may take cues from 
Bowers and Tarrant and act on the violent ideologies they derive from 
these online communities. In essence, these platforms serve as round-
the-clock white supremacist rallies, amplifying and fulfilling their 
vitriolic fantasies.

                               [all]

