
 - BUILDING ON OUR BASELINE: SECURING INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS AGAINST CYBER ATTACKS

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]



 
 BUILDING ON OUR BASELINE: SECURING INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS AGAINST 
                             CYBER ATTACKS

=======================================================================

                                HEARING

                               before the

                            SUBCOMMITTEE ON
                     CYBERSECURITY, INFRASTRUCTURE
                       PROTECTION, AND INNOVATION

                                 of the

                     COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
                        HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

                    ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

                             SECOND SESSION

                               __________

                           SEPTEMBER 15, 2022

                               __________

                           Serial No. 117-69

                               __________

       Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security
       
       
       
                                     

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


                                     

        Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov

                         __________
                                           
 
              U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE 
 50-027 PDF           WASHINGTON : 2022 
                              
                               
                               
                               

                     COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

               Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi, Chairman
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas            John Katko, New York
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island      Michael T. McCaul, Texas
Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey     Clay Higgins, Louisiana
J. Luis Correa, California           Michael Guest, Mississippi
Elissa Slotkin, Michigan             Dan Bishop, North Carolina
Emanuel Cleaver, Missouri            Jefferson Van Drew, New Jersey
Al Green, Texas                      Mariannette Miller-Meeks, Iowa
Yvette D. Clarke, New York           Diana Harshbarger, Tennessee
Eric Swalwell, California            Andrew S. Clyde, Georgia
Dina Titus, Nevada                   Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida
Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey    Jake LaTurner, Kansas
Kathleen M. Rice, New York           Peter Meijer, Michigan
Val Butler Demings, Florida          Kat Cammack, Florida
Nanette Diaz Barragan, California    August Pfluger, Texas
Josh Gottheimer, New Jersey          Andrew R. Garbarino, New York
Elaine G. Luria, Virginia            Mayra Flores, Texas
Tom Malinowski, New Jersey
Ritchie Torres, New York
                       Hope Goins, Staff Director
                 Daniel Kroese, Minority Staff Director
                          Natalie Nixon, Clerk
                                 ------                                

     SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY, INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION, AND 
                               INNOVATION

                 Yvette D. Clarke, New York, Chairwoman
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas            Andrew R. Garbarino, New York, 
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island          Ranking Member
Elissa Slotkin, Michigan             Michael Guest, Mississippi
Kathleen M. Rice, New York           Diana Harshbarger, Tennessee
Ritchie Torres, New York             Andrew S. Clyde, Georgia
Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi (ex  Jake LaTurner, Kansas
    officio)                         John Katko, New York (ex officio)
               Moira Bergin, Subcommittee Staff Director
          Austin Agrella, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director
                    Aaron Greene, Subcommittee Clerk
                    
                            C O N T E N T S

                              ----------                              
                                                                   Page

                               Statements

The Honorable Yvette D. Clarke, a Representative in Congress From 
  the State of New York, and Chairwoman, Subcommittee on 
  Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Innovation:
  Oral Statement.................................................     1
  Prepared Statement.............................................     3
The Honorable Andrew R. Garbarino, a Representative in Congress 
  From the State of New York, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on 
  Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Innovation:
  Oral Statement.................................................     4
  Prepared Statement.............................................     5
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress 
  From the State of Mississippi, and Chairman, Committee on 
  Homeland Security:
  Prepared Statement.............................................     5

                               Witnesses

Mr. Eric Goldstein, Executive Assistant Director for 
  Cybersecurity, Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security 
  Agency, U.S. Department of Homeland Security:
  Oral Statement.................................................     7
  Prepared Statement.............................................     8
Mr. Vergle Gipson, Senior Advisor, Cybercore Integration Center, 
  Idaho National Laboratory, U.S. Department of Energy:
  Oral Statement.................................................    11
  Prepared Statement.............................................    12

                                Appendix

Questions From Chairwoman Yvette D. Clarke for Eric Goldstein....    35
Questions From Ranking Member Andrew R. Garbarino for Eric 
  Goldstein......................................................    36
Questions From Honorable James Langevin for Vergle Gipson........    38
Questions From Ranking Member Andrew R. Garbarino for Vergle 
  Gipson.........................................................    39


 BUILDING ON OUR BASELINE: SECURING INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS AGAINST 
                             CYBER ATTACKS

                              ----------                              


                      Thursday, September 15, 2022

             U.S. House of Representatives,
                    Committee on Homeland Security,
                            Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, 
                                 Infrastructure Protection,
                                            and Innovation,
                                                    Washington, DC.
    The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:03 a.m., in 
room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Yvette D. Clarke 
[Chairwoman of the subcommittee] presiding.
    Present: Representatives Clarke, Jackson Lee, Langevin, 
Slotkin, Rice, Torres, Garbarino, Guest, Clyde, and LaTurner.
    Chairwoman Clarke. The Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, 
Infrastructure Protection, and Innovation will be in order.
    The subcommittee is meeting today to receive testimony on 
``Building Our Baseline: Securing Industrial Control Systems 
Against Cyber Attacks''.
    Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare the 
committee in recess at any point.
    Good morning. I would like to thank the witnesses for 
participating in today's hearing on securing the industrial 
control systems at the heart of our Nation's critical 
infrastructure. This is a topic that we, as lawmakers and 
Federal officials, don't spend nearly enough time talking 
about, working on, or funding. We rely on industrial control 
systems and other operational technology, or OT, to make sure 
we have power in our houses, clean water to drink, and the 
countless other functions and services essential to our health, 
safety, and livelihoods. Still, questions about how we secure 
these critical OT systems tend to take a backseat to 
traditional IT security. That is simply not an option in 
today's threat landscape, as OT becomes more interconnected, 
integrated with IT systems, and attractive target to our 
adversaries.
    In our industrial environment, the risks are not to stolen 
customer data or reputational harm to a company. The 
consequences can be deadly. An OT disruption could hurt our 
communities, our economy, and even our National security. Yet, 
in a recent report, the National Telecommunications Security 
Advisory Committee, or NSTAC, found that our ``biggest gap'' in 
OT security is our ``lack of urgency.'' The NSTAC diagnosis was 
simple: ``The U.S. has the technology and the knowledge to 
secure the systems but has not prioritized the resources'' to 
do so. In a hearing earlier this year, I said that the United 
States desperately needs to revamp its playbook for critical 
infrastructure cybersecurity. It is particularly true for OT 
security.
    Fortunately, I believe we are starting to see a shift in 
attitudes and the Biden administration is helping to lead that 
charge. In his first few months in office, President Biden 
launched a new ICS Cybersecurity Initiative, envisioned as a 
series of cybersecurity sprints, starting with the electricity 
subsector and then expanding to other sectors like pipelines 
and water. Last July, President Biden formalized this 
initiative in a National Security Memorandum on Improving 
Control System Security. The Memorandum also directed CISA to 
work with NIST on a set of cybersecurity performance goals to 
serve as clear guidance to operators about the level of 
security the American people can trust and should expect for 
such essential services. This statement reflects a commitment 
to three principles that should underpin the Federal approach 
to OT security.
    First, the American people are entitled to trust that the 
services they have grown to rely on meet a reasonable, baseline 
standard of security and resilience. Second, critical 
infrastructure operators have a responsibility to earn and 
maintain the trust of the American people. Finally, the Federal 
Government has a responsibility to bring its expertise, 
convening power, and resources to bear in support of this 
effort.
    I am pleased to have the Federal Government's lead convener 
for critical infrastructure, and the principal architect of 
those baseline standards, CISA, on our panel today. I know CISA 
has been working to complete the Common Baseline performance 
goals and I understand they will soon be finalized. I see these 
baseline goals as having real promise to reshape the OT 
security landscape, but they will only be as effective as 
CISA's ability to engage and incorporate the feedback they are 
hearing from stakeholders.
    I am also pleased to have another leader in Federal OT 
cybersecurity here today, the Idaho National Laboratory, to 
talk about how they are working to secure OT systems and 
support some of CISA's most critical OT programs, like 
CyberSentry, which I worked to codify last year. I would like 
to see this program grow and expand to new stakeholders, and I 
look forward to hearing how Congress can support that growth.
    I would also like to hear from CISA how it is targeting its 
efforts toward OT operators with the greatest need, and the 
fewest resources, for instance, small utilities or State and 
local governments.
    In this subcommittee, we often talk about the need to meet 
sectors where they are, recognizing their different security 
postures, resources, and expertise. That applies here as well. 
We need to do everything we can to make sure that efforts like 
the ICS sprints and the performance goals are designed to 
benefit all stakeholders, not just the most sophisticated. That 
will require the administration to identify lessons learned, 
and apply them, for instance, to the upcoming chemical sector 
sprint.
    Finally, as we are shoring up these programs and ICS 
investments, I also want to hear how we are investing in our 
ICS security work force and doing so in a way that fosters 
diversity.
    I thank our witnesses for joining us today and I look 
forward to our discussion.
    [The statement of Chairwoman Clarke follows:]
                Statement of Chairwoman Yvette D. Clarke
                           September 15, 2022
    I would like to thank the witnesses for participating in today's 
hearing on securing the industrial control systems at the heart of our 
Nation's critical infrastructure. This is a topic that we, as lawmakers 
and Federal officials, don't spend nearly enough time talking about, 
working on, or funding. We rely on industrial control systems and other 
operational technology, or OT, to make sure we have power in our 
houses, clean water to drink, and countless other functions and 
services essential to our health, safety, and livelihoods. Still, 
questions about how we secure these critical OT systems tend to take a 
backseat to traditional IT security.
    That is simply not an option in today's threat landscape--as OT 
grows increasingly connected to the internet, is more integrated with 
IT systems, and becomes a far more attractive target for cyber 
criminals and our adversaries. In an industrial environment, the risk 
of a cyber compromise is not limited to stolen customer data or 
reputational harm to a company. The consequences can be deadly. An OT 
disruption could hurt our communities, our economy, and even our 
National security. And yet, in a recent report, the National 
Telecommunications Security Advisory Committee, or NSTAC, found that 
our ``biggest gap'' in industrial cybersecurity is our ``lack of 
urgency.'' The NSTAC's diagnosis was simple: ``the U.S. has the 
technology and the knowledge to secure these systems but has not 
prioritized the resources'' to do so.
    In a hearing earlier this year, I said that the United States 
desperately needs to revamp its playbook for critical infrastructure 
cybersecurity. That is particularly true for OT security. Fortunately, 
I believe we are starting to see a shift in attitudes--and the Biden 
administration is helping to lead that charge. In his first few months 
in office, President Biden launched a new ICS Cybersecurity 
Initiative--envisioned as a series of cybersecurity sprints--starting 
with the electricity subsector and then expanding to other sectors like 
pipelines and water. Last July, President Biden formalized this 
Initiative in a National Security Memorandum on Improving Control 
System Security.
    The Memorandum also directed CISA to work with NIST on a set of 
cybersecurity performance goals to serve as clear guidance to operators 
about the level of security ``the American people can trust and should 
expect for such essential services.'' This statement reflects a 
commitment to three principles that should underpin the Federal 
approach to OT security. First, the American people are entitled to 
trust that the services they have grown to rely on meet a reasonable, 
baseline standard of security and resilience. Second, critical 
infrastructure operators have a responsibility to earn and maintain the 
trust of the American people. And finally, the Federal Government has a 
responsibility to bring its expertise, convening power, and resources 
to bear in support of this effort.
    I am pleased to have the Federal Government's lead ``convener'' for 
critical infrastructure, and the principal architect of those baseline 
standards, CISA, on our panel today. I know CISA has been working to 
complete the Common Baseline performance goals required by NSM-5, and I 
understand they will soon be finalized. I see these baseline standards 
as having real promise to reshape the OT security landscape--but they 
will only be as effective as CISA's ability to engage and incorporate 
the feedback they are hearing from stakeholders.
    I am also pleased to have another leader in Federal OT 
cybersecurity here today--Idaho National Laboratory--to talk about how 
they're working to secure OT systems and support some of CISA's most 
critical OT programs, like CyberSentry, which I worked to codify last 
year. I would like to see this program grow and expand to new 
stakeholders, and I look forward to hearing how Congress can support 
that growth. I would also like to hear how CISA is targeting its 
efforts toward OT operators with the greatest need, and the fewest 
resources--for instance, small utilities or State and local 
governments.
    In this subcommittee, we often talk about the need to meet sectors 
where they are--recognizing their different security postures, 
resources, and expertise. That applies here as well. We need to do 
everything we can to make sure that efforts like the ICS sprints and 
the performance goals are designed to benefit all stakeholders--not 
just the most sophisticated. That will require the administration to 
identify lessons learned, and apply them--for instance, to the upcoming 
chemical sector sprint. Finally, as we're shoring up these programs and 
ICS investments, I also want to hear how we're investing in our ICS 
security workforce--and doing so in a way that fosters diversity.

    Chairwoman Clarke. The Chair now recognizing the Ranking 
Member of the subcommittee, the gentleman from New York, Mr. 
Garbarino, for an opening statement.
    Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Chairwoman Clarke, what is sure 
to be an informative hearing today. I thank you to our 
witnesses for being here to discuss the threats posed by 
industrial control systems, also known as operational 
technology.
    The magnitude of these threats is often difficult for 
people to grasp, including Members of Congress. Securing the 
foundational technology that underpins our Nation's most 
critical functions is a National imperative. Industrial control 
systems are responsible for safely and securing operating 
informational technology throughout many critical 
infrastructure sectors, such as energy, water, and 
transportation systems.
    Most Americans are accustomed to the reliable delivery of 
National critical functions, like electricity and clean water, 
but many are not aware of the serious cyber risks these sectors 
face.
    In 2017 the world's biggest shipping company, Maersk, was 
one of the high-profile victims of the NotPetya attack. During 
this attack, NotPetya malware was able to infiltrate the 
company's industrial control systems, ultimately causing 
container ships and ports to grind to a halt for almost 9 days. 
Unfortunately, this incident was not solely isolated to the 
maritime and transportation sector as the pharmaceutical, food, 
and other industries were impacted as well.
    What is more, in 2021 alone 80 percent of industrial 
control system organizations reportedly experienced ransomware 
attacks. As more industrial control systems across critical 
infrastructure sectors become connected to the internet, the 
attack surface will continue to grow exponentially. These 
legacy industrial control systems were not originally designed 
to be internet-facing unless they do not have the appropriate 
level of cyber resilience baked into their foundations.
    To mitigate threats we must consider a thoughtful approach 
complementing--but sometimes unique from--our approach to 
traditional informational technology cybersecurity. While we 
must continue to innovate and evolve as a Nation to deliver 
better-, fast-
er-, and greater-performing services, we must also incorporate 
baseline cybersecurity protocols to these industrial control 
system environments to protect U.S. National and economic 
security.
    The Cybersecurity Infrastructure Security Agency works 
closely with Federal and private-sector partners to secure 
industrial control systems across the Federal enterprise and 
throughout each of the 16 critical infrastructure sectors. I am 
eager to hear CISA's perspective for the industrial control 
systems security from Eric Goldstein and I am looking forward 
to diving into the sector-specific industrial control system 
concerns of Mr. Gipson from the Idaho National Laboratory.
    Again, I would like to thank you all for being here. As I 
mentioned earlier, we look to experts like you to help us 
comprehend the magnitude of the threats facing industrial 
control systems and the potential solutions Congress could 
employ to bolster industrial control system cyber resilience.
    I look forward to learning something new today from each of 
our expert witnesses.
    Thank you again, Madam Chair, for holding today's hearing 
and I yield back.
    [The statement of Ranking Member Garbarino follows:]
            Statement of Ranking Member Andrew R. Garbarino
    Thank you, Chairwoman Clarke, for holding what is sure to be an 
informative hearing. And thank you to our witnesses for being here 
today to discuss the threats posed to industrial control systems (ICS), 
also known as Operational Technology (OT). The magnitude of these 
threats is often difficult for many people, including Members of 
Congress, to grasp.
    Securing the foundational technology that underpins our Nation's 
most critical functions is a National imperative. ICS systems are 
responsible for safely and securely operating informational technology 
(IT) and operational technology (OT) throughout many critical 
infrastructure sectors such as energy, water, and transportation 
systems, among others. Most Americans are accustomed to the reliable 
delivery of National critical functions, like electricity and clean 
water, but many are not aware of the serious cyber risks these sectors 
face.
    In 2017, the world's biggest shipping company, Maersk, was one of 
the high-profile victims of the NotPetya attack. During this attack, 
the NotPetya malware was able to infiltrate the company's ICS systems, 
ultimately, causing container ships and ports to grind to a halt for 
almost 9 days. Unfortunately, this incident was not solely isolated to 
the maritime and transportation sector, as the pharmaceutical, food, 
and other industries were impacted, as well. What's more, in 2021 
alone, 80 percent of ICS organizations reportedly experienced 
ransomware attacks.
    As more ICS systems across critical infrastructure sectors become 
connected to the internet, the attack surface will continue to grow 
exponentially. These legacy ICS systems were not originally designed to 
be internet-facing, and thus they do not have the appropriate level of 
cyber resilience baked into their foundations. To mitigate threats, we 
must consider a thoughtful approach, complementing--but sometimes 
unique from--our approach to traditional IT cybersecurity. While we 
must continue to innovate and evolve as a Nation to deliver better, 
faster, and greater performing services, we must also incorporate 
baseline cybersecurity protocols into these ICS environments to protect 
U.S. National and economic security.
    The Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) works 
closely with Federal and private-sector partners to secure industrial 
control systems across the Federal enterprise and throughout each of 
the 16 critical infrastructure sectors. I'm eager to hear CISA's 
perspective on ICS security from Eric Goldstein, and I'm looking 
forward to diving into the sector-specific ICS concerns of Mr. Gipson 
from the Idaho National Laboratory.
    Again, I would like to thank you all for being here. As I mentioned 
earlier, we look to experts like you to help us comprehend the 
magnitude of the threats facing industrial control systems, and the 
potential solutions Congress could employ to bolster ICS cyber 
resilience. I look forward to learning something new today from each of 
our expert witnesses. Thank you again Madam Chair for holding today's 
hearing.

    Chairwoman Clarke. I would like thank the Ranking Member.
    Members are also reminded that the subcommittee will 
operate according to the guidelines laid out by the Chairman 
and Ranking Member in their February 3, 2021 colloquy regarding 
remote procedures. Members may also submit statements for the 
record.
    [The statement of Chairman Thompson follows:]

                Statement of Chairman Bennie G. Thompson
                           September 15, 2022
    Operational technology underpins almost every aspect of how we live 
and work. From generating and distributing the electricity lighting 
this room, to ensuring that the water coming from the faucets is clean 
enough to drink, operational technology is the backbone of the National 
critical functions essential to public health, public safety, and 
National security. In the late summer, two ``National critical 
functions'' in Mississippi failed.
    Jackson, Mississippi is in the midst of a water crisis, leaving 
over 100,000 of my constituents without a clean water supply or 
appropriately-managed wastewater. They cannot use the water coming out 
of the faucets in their homes to brush their teeth, bathe, or wash the 
dishes. Tens of millions of gallons of untreated wastewater has flowed 
into Jackson-area waterways. Jackson schools had to revert to remote 
learning earlier this month because the toilets would not flush. 
Although the water crisis was not caused by a cyber attack, its 
horrific impacts and cascading consequences underscore the urgency of 
ensuring the safety, reliability, and functionality of the industrial 
control systems that support National critical functions. For me, the 
Jackson water crisis frames the way I think about today's hearing.
    Since I became Chairman of the committee again in 2019, I have 
expressed my concerns about the cybersecurity posture of the water 
sector, and I am pleased that we now have a President who has made 
improving it a priority. Earlier this year, the full committee received 
testimony from the American Water Works Association about the 
challenges facing municipal water authorities as they work to improve 
their cybersecurity and about the ICS Cybersecurity Initiative water 
``sprint.'' We learned that water authorities struggle to stretch their 
budgets to invest in cybersecurity, and that Federal support needs to 
be tailored to the existing maturity and resources of the sector.
    A draft report on the convergence of operational and information 
technology by the National Security Telecommunications Advisory 
Committee released in August confirmed these findings. As the committee 
continues its oversight of the Federal Government's ICS security 
efforts, we are learning that stakeholders are eager to partner--
provided that the Government is collaborative and transparent. Toward 
that end, I have three goals for this hearing.
    First, I am interested in knowing what support CISA has provided to 
the city of Jackson during the water crisis--including in helping the 
city understand the cascading effects of being without water. Second, I 
want to understand what CISA learned about the cybersecurity posture of 
the water sector through the ICS cybersecurity sprint, and what 
resources CISA brought to bear as it collaborated with the 
Environmental Protection Agency. Finally, I am interested in learning 
how CISA is encouraging ICS owners and operators to prioritize 
cybersecurity and resilience and invest in it accordingly.
    I support the development of voluntary security guidelines, but 
they will only make us more secure if the private sector agrees to 
implement them. There are certain things the public should be able to 
rely on. Being able to drink the water coming out of the faucet is one 
of those things. If we are going to rely on voluntary security goals to 
protect ICS from cyber attacks, we must ensure that stakeholders are 
incentivized and able to implement them.

    Chairwoman Clarke. I now welcome our panel of witnesses.
    First, I would like to welcome Mr. Eric Goldstein, the 
executive assistant director for cybersecurity at the 
Cybersecurity Infrastructure Security Agency, CISA. Mr. 
Goldstein runs CISA's cybersecurity division. Previously, Mr. 
Goldstein was the head of cybersecurity policy, strategy, and 
regulation at Goldman Sachs. Mr. Goldstein also served at 
CISA's predecessor agency, the National Protection and Programs 
Directorate.
    Next we will hear from Mr. Virgil Gipson, a senior advisor 
at Idaho National Laboratories Cyber Integration Center. Before 
joining INL, Mr. Gipson spent over 3 decades at the National 
Security Agency, NSA, where he served in senior leadership in 
technical roles.
    Without objection, the witness' full statements will be 
inserted in the record.
    I now ask both witnesses to summarize their statements for 
5 minutes, beginning with Mr. Goldstein.

 STATEMENT OF ERIC GOLDSTEIN, EXECUTIVE ASSISTANT DIRECTOR FOR 
   CYBERSECURITY, CYBERSECURITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE SECURITY 
          AGENCY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

    Mr. Goldstein. Thank you.
    Madam Chair, Ranking Member, Members of the subcommittee, 
it is a privilege to rejoin the group today and talk about this 
critically important topic. I applaud your focus on this issue, 
as well as the depth of understanding and insight reflected in 
both of your opening statements.
    Madam Chair, as you noted, the security of control systems 
in operational technology is of paramount importance for this 
country. Americans rely every day on services enabled by 
control systems, from health care to mass transit to water to 
energy. This priority is of the utmost importance for CISA and 
the broader Biden-Harris administration. This priority is 
exemplified, Madam Chair, as you noted, by President Biden's 
National Security Memorandum on securing critical 
infrastructure control systems issues just last year, which 
called for a series of cybersecurity sprints and the 
development of cybersecurity performance goals.
    At CISA, our work to enable and support security and 
control systems is predicated on three core principles.
    First, a focus on partnership, understanding the diverse 
ecosystem of organizations across the control systems community 
that must come together to enable important change.
    Second, the important differences between operational 
technology and more traditional IT, which requires thoughtful 
consideration when adopting appropriate cybersecurity 
solutions.
    Third, the fact that many organizations using control 
systems face uniquely high demands for availability and face 
unique operational risks, which further requires deep 
consideration and collaboration when recommending or supporting 
particular security measures.
    Now, with these principles in mind, at CISA we are focused 
on deepening our operational collaboration across the ICS 
community, on providing trusted and authoritative guidance to 
help organizations adopt the right security measures at the 
right time across the ecosystem, and developing cybersecurity 
performance goals that will help organizations make the right 
investments with their next security dollar to drive progress 
toward the most important security outcomes.
    Now, of course, we start first in everything we do with 
partnership and operational collaboration. We were delighted 
this past April to stand up our Joint Cyber Defense 
Collaborative ICS Group, which brings together device 
manufacturers, integrators, security providers, and owner/
operators to take on shared challenges in the control systems 
and OT space. This group right now is working on a cyber 
defense plan focused on enhancing the efficiency, 
effectiveness, and speed of sharing the threat vulnerability 
information across this broad ecosystem.
    Now, Madam Chair, you raised a wonderful point, which is 
the importance when thinking about collaboration of not just 
focusing on the most mature organization, but those that are, 
as we call them, target-rich and cyber-poor. Making sure that 
those organizations that are less resourced are still able to 
raise their own bar for cybersecurity. In that regard, we are 
looking forward to launching our State and Local Tribal and 
Territorial Cyber Grant Program. We are expanding our regional 
forces to meet organizations where they are and proving easy-
to-use guidance and assessment tools.
    Now, on this last point, we are also really focused on 
serving as a trusted and authoritative source of guidance. I 
mean the cybersecurity performance goals play an important role 
here. These goals, which again were derived from the 
President's National Security Memorandum, call on CISA and NIST 
to work collaboratively in developing a set of goals that 
organizations can use to inform resource prioritizations. Now, 
really importantly, these goals are voluntary by design, were 
developed as part of a richly collaborative process. We 
received over 2,000 comments on the draft goals over 2 rounds 
of feedback and countless workshops and listening session. 
Excitingly, these goals are designed to be used in conjunction 
with the NIST cybersecurity framework that is already adopted 
by many organizations across the country. The goals, when they 
are launched, will provide more specificity and measurability 
to help organizations prioritize their security investments. 
Even when the goals are launched, our dialog and our work will 
continue as we will keep receiving feedback on the baseline 
cross-sector goals and begin our work in developing center-
specific goals that are tailored to the unique considerations 
of each individual sector.
    You know, the risk we face as a country in securing our 
control systems and OT is extraordinary. CISA, with our 
partners, is taking on this challenge head-on by providing 
performance goals, making work easier for organizations that 
are less mature, serving as a trusted and authoritative source 
of guidance, including by enabling the coordinated disclosure 
of vulnerabilities in control systems, and enabling increased 
visibility across the control systems and OT landscape by 
encouraging adoption of commercial solutions and by providing 
our cyber protection ability to organizations that need it 
most.
    Thank you again for the privilege of joining today. It is 
always an honor and I look forward to your questions.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Goldstein follows:]
                  Prepared Statement of Eric Goldstein
                           September 15, 2022
    Chairwoman Clarke, Ranking Member Garbarino, and Members of the 
subcommittee, thank you for your invitation to testify today on behalf 
of the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency. I appreciate 
the opportunity to highlight how CISA supports our Nation's industrial 
control systems (ICS) and operational technology (OT) communities 
against cyber threats that have the potential of impacting National 
Critical Functions and the provision of essential services to the 
American people.
    As reflected in President Biden's National Security Memorandum 
(NSM)--5, ``Improving Cybersecurity for Critical Infrastructure Control 
Systems,'' securing ICS and OT assets is a top priority of the Biden-
Harris administration, and CISA is privileged to serve in a central 
role in implementing this directive, alongside our Federal and industry 
partners. NSM-5 directed an unprecedented focus on ICS cybersecurity 
across the U.S. Government through a series of ``sprints'' focused on 
the electricity, pipeline, and water sectors and through the 
development of baseline cybersecurity performance goals.
    Our Nation's ICS and OT community is a complex ecosystem comprised 
of device manufacturers, integrators, owners and operators of critical 
infrastructure, and security providers. CISA serves as a trusted 
partner within the ICS and OT ecosystem to provide information, 
guidance, and capabilities that enable faster and more scalable 
reduction of risks facing ICS and OT assets. Our goal is to meet the 
unique requirements of the ICS and OT community by continuously 
evaluating and improving our capabilities to support the areas of 
greatest need, recognizing that many ICS and OT environments require 
approaches and solutions that differ from traditional Information 
Technology environments.
                       operational collaboration
    Over the past decade, we learned that traditional methods of 
public-private partnership characterized by intermittent, 
unidirectional information sharing did not scale to meet the pace of 
the adversary or the velocity of technological change. With the support 
of Congress, we shifted the paradigm toward continuous collaboration to 
empower synchronized cybersecurity planning, cyber defense, and 
response. The Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative (JCDC) brings together 
critical partners in Government and the private sector to engage in 
persistent collaboration and joint cyber defense planning.
    In April 2022, we expanded the JCDC to focus on ICS security and 
brought in new partners to help lead this important work. Through the 
creation of focused collaboration channels, the JCDC-ICS is positioned 
to quickly share, analyze, and enrich information about threats and 
vulnerabilities affecting ICS assets. Additionally, the JCDC-ICS 
initiative catalyzed a new planning effort intended to expedite 
collaboration across the ICS ecosystem, bringing together Government, 
critical infrastructure operators, ICS vendors, and ICS security 
providers with unprecedented cohesion and scale. As we continue to 
bring on new partners, CISA will mature the JCDC's structure and 
operational approaches to maximize value for the ICS community.
       serving as an authoritative source of trusted information
    As a core part of our mission to advance security of the ICS and OT 
communities, CISA collaboratively develops trusted information to help 
organizations more effectively mitigate vulnerabilities. This 
information generally takes two forms.
    First, we develop Cybersecurity Advisories with inter-agency and 
international partners on urgent threats and risks, such as the joint 
product with the National Security Agency (NSA) and Federal Bureau of 
Investigation (FBI) from April 13, 2022, on APT cyber tools targeting 
ICS/SCADA devices; our joint product with the Department of Energy 
(DOE) on March 29, 2022, regarding targeting uninterruptable power 
supplies; and our March 24, 2022, joint product with FBI and DOE on 
threats from Russian state-sponsored cyber actors targeting the energy 
sector. These products, many of which benefited from input from 
private-sector partners, are intended to turn raw intelligence into 
actionable guidance information with increased speed for organizations 
across the country.
    Second, CISA's ICS Vulnerability Response and Disclosure program 
regularly publishes ICS Advisories to share information about impactful 
vulnerabilities. The program serves as a trusted partner with 
cybersecurity researchers and product vendors to effectively identify, 
enable mitigation, and publicly disclose vulnerabilities impacting 
control systems and operational technology. CISA coordinated the timely 
disclosure of thousands of vulnerabilities and their associated 
mitigations, which otherwise would affect systems and hardware 
supporting critical functions such as the electric grid, hospitals, 
building automation systems, defense systems, data centers, and other 
crucial systems. In 2022, CISA already has published over 300 such 
Advisories representing thousands of vulnerabilities in a variety of 
ICS/OT products. These vulnerabilities impact products used across a 
wide variety of sectors, including Energy, Critical Manufacturing, 
Water and Wastewater Systems, Food and Agriculture, and Chemical. We 
work closely with stakeholders across Government and industry to 
identify the most impactful ways to disseminate vulnerability 
information, including through machine-readable data that can be 
ingested and actioned through automation and by providing guidance that 
enables prioritization of the most significant risks. CISA will soon 
begin producing machine-readable ICS Advisories in the Common Security 
Advisory Framework (CSAF) format, which will enable automated and 
timely exchange of vulnerability advisory information in an 
interoperable manner, and we urge all vendors of ICS and OT products to 
adopt this approach.
                    enabling operational visibility
    A prerequisite for optimized operational collaboration and 
provision of timely, actionable guidance is visibility into the 
targeting of ICS and OT systems. We must know how malicious actors are 
attempting to compromise systems, where they are succeeding, and which 
security measures are most effective in stopping them. To gain 
visibility into the breadth of malicious activity targeting American 
networks, we work with our JCDC partners to build an ecosystem of 
continuous collaboration where traffic or an incident seen by one 
partner can be rapidly shared across both private and public-sector 
entities for analysis, enrichment, and correlation. To gain deeper 
visibility into particular sectors, we are partnering with a small 
number of ICS security companies to give our analysts the ability to 
determine whether a given threat has been seen before, while preserving 
anonymity of the security companies' customers.
    Finally, for select critical infrastructure entities, we provide 
access to our CyberSentry program. CyberSentry is a CISA-managed threat 
detection and monitoring program that allows our analysts to directly 
detect attempts to compromise critical ICS networks. Through a 
strategic and narrow deployment, CyberSentry leverages sensitive data 
to provide enhanced visibility that can be used by CISA and our 
partners to better defend critical infrastructure networks. CyberSentry 
is not a replacement for a company's own ICS cybersecurity program or 
security providers; rather, this program provides an additive layer of 
visibility where the Nation needs it most. We continue to encourage all 
organizations to adopt commercial ICS monitoring solutions by 
publishing guidance that provides a list of criteria organizations 
should consider when evaluating a commercial ICS monitoring solution. 
We are grateful to Congress for authorizing the CyberSentry program, 
and we look forward to expanding it to additional partners in the 
months to come.
                    enabling prioritized investment
    A key pillar of President Biden's NSM-5 directed CISA and NIST to 
develop cybersecurity performance goals for critical infrastructure, 
which ``should serve as clear guidance to owners and operators about 
cybersecurity practices and postures that the American people can trust 
and should expect for such essential services.'' Referred to as the 
Common Baseline, it aims to identify a set of practices that critical 
infrastructure owners and operators should employ to protect systems 
supporting National Critical Functions and reduce risks to National 
security, economic security, and public health and safety. This Common 
Baseline represents a combination of best practices for IT and OT 
owners and sets forth a prioritized list of security controls. These 
practices are also intended to be a benchmark for critical 
infrastructure operators to measure and improve their cybersecurity 
maturity.
    Unlike other control frameworks, the Common Baseline considers not 
only the practices that address risk to individual entities, but also 
the aggregate risk to the Nation. Rather than a comprehensive catalog, 
the Common Baseline captures a core set of high-impact controls and 
practices with known risk-reduction value that are broadly applicable 
across sectors. Organizations can use the Common Baseline to prioritize 
the security controls which work most effectively to reduce risk in 
their environments. This prioritization can help determine how to most 
prudently allocate investments toward specific security practices.
    The Common Baseline is voluntary by design, and the draft goals 
were developed through a highly collaborative process. CISA received 
over 2,000 comments across two separate rounds of review, which 
included multiple workshops with critical infrastructure partners, ICS 
and OT experts, and the general public. Importantly, the Common 
Baseline is designed to be utilized in conjunction with and in support 
of the NIST Cybersecurity Framework (CSF), which is the de facto 
standard for all organizations to build and evaluate their 
cybersecurity programs. The Common Baseline extends the CSF by 
identifying the most impactful controls across both IT and OT systems 
and describes both the scope and measurements for those controls so 
that it is easier for asset owners to implement and attest to their 
security posture. Organizations that are already using the NIST CSF or 
other frameworks can easily determine where they are already making 
progress toward achieving particular goals in the Common Baseline and 
where more investment may be required. We look forward to releasing the 
next iteration of the Common Baseline this fall, with continued 
collaboration across the cybersecurity community on further maturation 
of the baseline goals and sector-specific goals.
                               conclusion
    Advancing the security and resilience of industrial control systems 
(ICS) will continue to be a top priority for CISA and the Biden-Harris 
Administration. As the lead agency for civilian cybersecurity and the 
National coordinator for critical infrastructure security and 
resilience, we will continue to partner with organizations across the 
ICS and OT ecosystem to identify and reduce risk facing our Nation's 
most critical systems. With the continued support of Congress, we will 
make measurable progress toward these essential goals.

    Chairwoman Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Goldstein, for your 
testimony here today.
    I will now recognize Mr. Gipson to summarize his statement 
for 5 minutes.

     STATEMENT OF VERGLE GIPSON, SENIOR ADVISOR, CYBERCORE 
INTEGRATION CENTER, IDAHO NATIONAL LABORATORY, U.S. DEPARTMENT 
                           OF ENERGY

    Mr. Gipson. Chairwoman Clarke, Ranking Member Garbarino, 
Members of the subcommittee, thank you for the invitation to 
testify on a topic critical to the security of our Nation.
    I am Vergle Gipson and I am a senior advisor at Idaho 
National Laboratory. I am an expert in cyber threat and 
critical infrastructure cybersecurity.
    By nearly all measures, cyber risk to our Nation's critical 
infrastructure continues to increase. Unfortunately, this trend 
is likely to continue because our adversaries view cyber 
vulnerabilities as a low-risk, often unattributable means to 
strike our Nation. Acts of cyber-enabled sabotage are possible 
because our Nation's infrastructure is highly dependent on 
industrial control systems.
    These industrial control systems, also known as operational 
technology, govern and execute complex processes at 
substations, manufacturing facilities, water treatment 
facilities, military bases, transportation hubs, and much more.
    In contrast to information technology--IT, like personal 
computers and business networks--operational technology is not 
as widely protected. There are several reasons for this 
including, first, systems management. Most IT is upgraded or 
replaced every 3 to 5 years, software and firmware is 
frequently updated and patches are routinely installed. On the 
other hand, operational technology is often designed to last 
for decades and is typically only updated if a noticeable 
failure occurs.
    Second is standardization. Most IT is designed and operated 
using industry best practices for cybersecurity that are widely 
adopted. By contrast, operational technology is often custom-
engineered for specific systems.
    Third, is discovery tools. The IT industry has developed a 
wide range of products to discover malicious activities and 
vulnerabilities. However, a few discovery tools exist for 
operational technology.
    To help simplify this complex issue, I find it helpful to 
think of cyber risk as a function of threats, vulnerabilities, 
and consequences. As adversaries increas their capabilities and 
their intent to conduct malicious cyber activity, the threat to 
U.S. infrastructure rises. As the complexity and number of 
digital system increases, the cyber vulnerabilities in U.S. 
infrastructure rises. As our society becomes more reliant on an 
increasing number of digitally-connected systems, the 
consequences of cyber attacks also increase.
    However, this cyber risk can be greatly reduced, and in 
some cases eliminated. We at Idaho National Laboratory are 
working with CISA, the Department of Energy, the Department of 
Defense, industry, and others to reduce cyber threats, 
vulnerabilities, and consequences.
    Idaho National Laboratory is managed by Battelle Energy 
Alliance for the Department of Energy and is focused on 
innovations in nuclear research, renewable energy systems, and 
National security systems. From our decades of work building 
and testing more than 50 nuclear reactors, the Lab has 
developed a deep understanding of operational technology and 
the cybersecurity, engineering, and processes needed to provide 
critical function assurance.
    For more than 18 years, CISA and its predecessor 
organizations, have leveraged the Lab's capabilities and proven 
leadership. Current Laboratory technical support to CISA 
includes discovering cyber vulnerabilities and partnering to 
develop mitigations, providing technical expertise in response 
to cyber incidents, developing analytic tools to detect 
malicious behavior and to identify cross-sector dependencies, 
developing methods and tools to assess the security of critical 
infrastructure systems, and creating cybersecurity and 
infrastructure protection training for the industrial control 
systems work force.
    Looking forward, to address some of the most critical gaps 
surrounding industrial control system cybersecurity, the Lab 
recommends, first, creating an industrial control system 
cybersecurity center of excellence to drive research and 
development among the community of practice. Second, maturing 
cyber-informed engineering to address cybersecurity issues 
early in the life cycle of engineered systems by leveraging the 
Department of Energy's National cyber-informed engineering 
strategy. Third, expanding cyber physical test environments to 
support development of sector-specific cyber risk mitigations.
    I appreciate the opportunity to testify and I look forward 
to your questions.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Gipson follows:]
                  Prepared Statement of Vergle Gipson
                           September 15, 2022
                              introduction
    Chairwoman Clarke, Ranking Member Garbarino, and Members of the 
subcommittee, thank you for the invitation to testify on a topic 
critical to the security of our Nation. My name is Vergle Gipson, and 
I'm a senior advisor at Idaho National Laboratory. Prior to joining the 
Laboratory 5 years ago, I retired from the Senior Executive Service 
after more than 30 years at the National Security Agency working a 
variety of cyber-related issues. I'm an expert in cyber threat and 
critical infrastructure cybersecurity.
                               testimony
    By nearly all measures, cyber risk to our Nation's critical 
infrastructure continues to increase. Unfortunately, this trend is 
likely to continue because our adversaries view cyber vulnerabilities 
as a low-risk, often unattributable means by which to strike our 
Nation. Foreign and domestic acts of cyber-enabled sabotage are 
possible because our Nation's infrastructure is highly dependent on 
industrial control systems. Widely known as ``operational technology,'' 
industrial control systems govern and execute complex processes at 
substations, manufacturing facilities, water treatment facilities, 
military bases, transportation hubs, and much more. From regulating the 
flow of oil and natural gas in pipelines to purifying our drinking 
water supply, millions of digitally-connected devices--such as 
protective relays, programmable logic controllers, and human-machine 
interfaces--keep our society running day-in and day-out. All of the 
Nation's 16 critical infrastructure sectors rely on operational 
technology.
    In contrast to Information Technology (IT) like personal computers, 
business networks, and databases, operational technology is not as 
widely protected. There are several reasons for this, and I will touch 
a on few of them:
   Refresh cycle.--While most IT is upgraded or replaced every 
        3 to 5 years, operational technology is often built and 
        designed to last for decades. Many of the industrial control 
        systems in our critical infrastructure today were designed 20 
        or more years ago, before the need for robust cyber defenses 
        was fully understood.
   Standardization.--Most IT is designed, installed, and 
        operated using industry best practices for cybersecurity that 
        are widely adopted and accepted. By contrast, operational 
        technology is often a custom engineering design, created to 
        meet exact specifications for its end user.
   Management.--IT is actively managed--software and firmware 
        are updated, and patches are routinely installed. Operational 
        technology is typically passively managed, only updated or 
        replaced if a noticeable failure or fault occurs.
   Discovery tools.--The IT industry has developed a wide range 
        of products to detect and discover malicious code and 
        vulnerabilities. For instance, think about the wide variety of 
        anti-virus software available for purchase and use on home or 
        business computers. By contrast, few discovery tools exist for 
        operational technology.
   Intent.--While threats against IT systems target information 
        like financial data or proprietary business dealings, threats 
        against operational technology target physical processes like 
        the flow of electric power or the production of our food 
        supply.
    To help simplify this extraordinarily complex issue, I find it 
helpful to think of cyber risk as a function of threats, 
vulnerabilities, and consequences. As adversaries increase their 
capabilities and their intent to conduct malicious cyber activity, the 
threat to U.S. infrastructure rises. As the complexity and number of 
digital systems increases, the cyber vulnerabilities in U.S. 
infrastructure also rises. Not only are those vulnerabilities inherent 
in the systems themselves, but they're also introduced by adversaries 
through supply chain operations and other means. As our society becomes 
more reliant on an increasing number of digitally-connected systems, 
the consequences of cyber attacks also increase. In short, multiple 
factors affecting cyber threats, vulnerabilities, and consequences are 
driving the increase in cyber risk, and that trend is likely to 
continue.
    In the last two decades, the risk of a cyber attack against our 
critical infrastructure has transitioned from being theoretically 
possible to documented and proven. As protection strategies, tools, and 
expertise have improved in the IT environment, adversaries have 
likewise improved their techniques and are expanding to other target-
rich environments including critical infrastructure. However, this 
cyber risk can be greatly reduced and, in some cases, eliminated. We at 
Idaho National Laboratory, with our unique capabilities in 
cybersecurity for operational technology, are working with the 
Department of Homeland Security's Cybersecurity and Infrastructure 
Security Agency (CISA), the Department of Energy (DOE), the Department 
of Defense (DoD), industry, and others to reduce cyber threats, 
vulnerabilities, and consequences.
    Idaho National Laboratory (INL) is one of 17 U.S. Department of 
Energy (DOE) National Laboratories and is managed by Battelle Energy 
Alliance. Located in Idaho Falls, Idaho, INL employs more than 5,400 
researchers and support staff focused on innovations in nuclear 
research, renewable energy systems, and National security solutions. 
INL's National security mission focuses on protecting the Nation's 
critical infrastructure, preventing the proliferation of weapons of 
mass destruction, and providing direct support to America's 
warfighters. From our decades-long work in building and testing more 
than 50 nuclear reactors in the high desert west of Idaho Falls, INL 
has developed a deep understanding of operational technology and the 
cybersecurity, engineering, and processes needed to secure systems and 
provide critical function assurance. With a large 890-square-mile site, 
INL cannot only create new industrial control system security 
solutions, but also test and demonstrate those security solutions at 
scale in full-size test environments.
    For more than 18 years, CISA and its predecessor organizations have 
leveraged INL's unique capabilities and proven leadership in the 
discovery, development, testing, and demonstration of advanced 
technology solutions. Specifically, INL's experience providing 
solutions to address critical infrastructure security needs, and INL's 
relationships with both private and public stakeholders, has helped 
CISA address the needs of the entire critical infrastructure community 
against the ever-evolving set of natural and man-made hazards the 
Nation faces. INL technical support to CISA includes:
   Vulnerabilities.--Discovering and/or helping develop 
        mitigations against hundreds of vulnerabilities affecting 
        operational technology products including several high-profile 
        vulnerabilities impacting U.S. Critical Infrastructure.
   Hunt and Incident Response Operations.--Providing industrial 
        control systems technical expertise during responses to 
        operational technology-related incidents including identifying 
        vulnerabilities and hunting for evidence of threat actors.
   Analysis.--Developing analytic tools and platforms that 
        enable both CISA and critical infrastructure partners to detect 
        malicious and anomalous behavior, to identify and understand 
        cross-sector dependencies, and to perform analysis of all 
        potential hazards.
   Assessments.--Developing and continuing to support 
        methodologies and tools focused on the assessment and design 
        review of critical infrastructure systems and environments.
   Training.--Creating and delivering training focused on 
        educating the industrial control systems and IT workforce on 
        cybersecurity, and bridging the knowledge gap that exists 
        within organizations, through unique hands-on experiences and 
        virtual learning environments that require them to collaborate.
    INL stands ready to do even more to reduce the cyber risks to our 
Nation's critical infrastructure. INL's unique facilities are 
singularly positioned to support a wide variety of research, analysis, 
testing, and validation opportunities for Federal and industrial 
collaborators. Comprising a cyber-physical infrastructure test range, 
co-located laboratories, several technology-specific test ranges, and 
available air space, this premier research environment allows testing--
from modeling and simulation to full-scale--to be conducted safely and 
securely. More than 100,000 square feet of specialized laboratory 
testing space staffed by experts in operational technology, 
cybersecurity, power systems engineering, vulnerability assessments, 
and dependency analysis enables the creation, testing, and 
demonstration of the next-generation control system cybersecurity 
solutions the Nation needs now and well into the future.
    To address some of the most critical research and capability gaps 
surrounding industrial control system cybersecurity, INL recommends the 
following:
    1. Creation of an industrial control systems cybersecurity Center 
        of Excellence.--This Center of Excellence would serve as a 
        focal point for increased information sharing among a community 
        of practice that includes Government, industry, academia, and 
        other National Laboratories; create a vehicle for further 
        investments in cybersecurity research and development; and 
        advance the science of securing operational technology to stay 
        ahead of our cyber adversaries' rapidly-evolving tactics.
    2. Directed research to mature Cyber-Informed Engineering (CIE).--
        Cyber-Informed Engineering encourages addressing cybersecurity 
        issues early in the design life cycle of engineered systems to 
        reduce cyber risks. The Secretary of Energy recently released a 
        National Cyber-Informed Engineering Strategy focused on the 
        energy sector that could be expanded to address all U.S. 
        critical infrastructure.
    3. Expansion of INL cyber-physical test environments to support 
        development of cyber risk mitigations.--This expansion would 
        enable the research and development of mitigation strategies, 
        the analysis of product and system vulnerabilities, the 
        understanding of emerging adversary tactics, and other 
        cybersecurity efforts reliant on representative test 
        environments. This expansion should include the addition of 
        full-scale, sector-specific, cyber-physical test environments 
        for priority infrastructure systems, including water and 
        wastewater, transportation, oil and natural gas, and critical 
        manufacturing.
    I appreciate the opportunity to testify, and I want to thank you 
again for your attention to this very important issue for our Nation. I 
look forward to your questions.

    Chairwoman Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Gipson, for your 
testimony here today.
    I will remind the subcommittee that we will each have 5 
minutes to question the panel.
    I will now recognize myself for questions.
    The Biden administration has taken proactive steps to 
secure critical infrastructure control systems, but there is 
much more to do. So my question is to both of you gentlemen.
    What more could the administration be doing toward 
industrial cybersecurity? What milestones should we be looking 
at to see over the next 5 to 10 years?
    Mr. Goldstein. Thank you, ma'am, that is a wonderful 
question.
    As you know, the administration has made this issue an 
absolute top priority and we have now set forth a strategy and 
a series of efforts that we believe will make measurable 
impact, working with our partners, in the months and years to 
come.
    A few of these lines of effort include the cybersecurity 
performance goals. We look forward to releasing the baseline 
cross-sector goals here soon and then immediately turning to 
work on the sector-specific performance goals. Where sectors 
uniquely utilize control systems and OT, we look forward to 
exploring how these performance goals can help organizations 
prioritize the right investments in securing their ICS and OT 
environments on a voluntary basis in accordance with the 
performance goals.
    Of equal importance is our collaborative work, particularly 
with the vendor security provider and integrator community, as 
the Ranking Member noted, to ensure that we are providing 
needed support and assistance in adopting, for example, more 
security protocols and security by design measure in many 
control systems and OT technologies that were designed 
historically for availability and reliability and now need to 
be improved to ensure that security is also top in mind. We 
will be doing a lot of that work through our Joint Cyber 
Defense Collaborative, but again working closely with our 
partners across sectors.
    Beyond that, we are also really focused on ensuring that we 
are enabling prompt identification of vulnerabilities in the 
control systems and OT environment to ensure that when a risk 
is identified, it is rapidly remediated across sectors to 
reduce, as my co-witness noted, the opening that our 
adversaries have to cause an intrusion and cause harm.
    Mr. Gipson. So we at Idaho National Lab provide technical 
support to CISA and others in the administration, other 
organizations. As I laid out in my testimony a moment ago, big 
things on our mind include that center of excellence to do more 
to encourage cyber informed engineering, changing the culture 
among engineers to recognize cybersecurity as a fundamental 
tenet just as engineers currently recognize functionality, 
reliability, and safety.
    Then, finally, having more representative test environments 
that are close to real life to experiment and develop 
mitigations that will work in the real world environment for 
specific sectors.
    So there is so much that needs to be done here.
    So in addition to all of the great cyber hygiene things 
that need to be done to establish a baseline across our 
critical infrastructure, we also need to identify what are 
those high-consequence events that we simply can't allow to 
occur as a Nation and then working together between Government 
and industry to find ways to mitigate the risks to eliminate 
those high-consequence events that could be catastrophic.
    Chairwoman Clarke. As the Federal Government funnels 
resources into new infrastructure projects today, how can we 
make sure the OT investments we are making now have security 
built in for the threats of tomorrow?
    Mr. Goldstein. Thank you, ma'am.
    Certainly we are at a unique time in this country's 
infrastructure where resources, including through the 
Infrastructure, Investment and Jobs Act, will cause an 
extraordinary maturation and modernization of this country's 
infrastructure across sectors. At CISA we are working with our 
partners across the Federal Government to provide guidance and 
support to enable adoption of security by design and security 
by default principles in as many of those projects as possible. 
Certainly our colleagues, for example, at the Department of 
Energy are taking a similar approach. So with the extraordinary 
work of Congress here in enabling funding through the IIJA, we 
will hope that this funding will lead not only to dramatic 
modernization and access for all Americans, but also increases 
its security as well.
    Mr. Gipson. This is a big opportunity for us in the United 
States that a lot of the existing infrastructure simply isn't 
securable from a cyber viewpoint. So as we are upgrading and 
replacing infrastructure, it is the perfect time to make that 
infrastructure cyber secure and defendable. The design stage is 
the right place to start. So we have to find a way to educate 
those who are engineering and building new systems and those 
who are engineering and building the components in those 
systems, that that work is done with cybersecurity in mind, so 
when those new systems are installed and become operational 
they can be defended.
    Chairwoman Clarke. Very well.
    I now recognize the Ranking Member of the subcommittee, the 
gentleman from New York, Mr. Garbarino, for his questions.
    Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Chairwoman.
    Mr. Goldstein, you mentioned in your opening statement that 
you are looking forward to the State and local grant program. 
Where are we with that right now?
    Mr. Goldstein. Thank you, sir.
    As you know, we are really excited for this program. It is 
really a new opportunity to drive some extraordinary maturation 
across our partners, many which lack resources to adopt needed 
security practices in the face of modern threats. We are 
preparing in the near future to announce the notice of funding 
opportunity, which is going to provide the window for SLTT 
organizations to apply for cybersecurity grants. We see these 
grants as being foundational, not only in providing the ability 
to deploy needed technologies, but also for organizations to 
really increase their level of cybersecurity governance, to 
develop cybersecurity plans, programs, and procedures that are 
necessary to manage effectively the risk that we are all seeing 
everyday.
    Mr. Garbarino. So but in the near future you are 
expecting----
    Mr. Goldstein. Yes, sir.
    Mr. Garbarino [continuing]. To open up for application? 
Great. It is good to hear.
    I wanted to ask you, because this is something that came 
out yesterday, the Office of Management and Budget released new 
guidance on secure software procurement requirements and, you 
know, directive under the President's Improving National 
Security Executive Order, and the common concern we have heard 
from industry is that requirements like this are often 
inconsistent across the Federal agencies. Is CISA planning on 
working with or have they worked with OMB to ensure that there 
is consistency of these new requirements across the Federal 
Civilian Executive Branch?
    Mr. Goldstein. Absolutely. At the outset we are really 
excited to see OMB's software security memo be released. This 
memo is going to significantly increase accountability and 
transparency for the security of software used by the Federal 
Executive branch. But we feel that the implications are likely 
broader. So as we think through putting forth voluntary 
guidance for organizations, how to think about software 
security, how to make the right requests for suppliers of 
software for the organizations, including critical 
infrastructure, the work being done by CISA and OMB for the 
Federal Government we feel like is ostensible to be adopted on 
a voluntary basis by entities across the country. So as one 
example of that, as we think through what performance goals 
might look like for the IT sector, we are going to work really 
collaboratively with IT organizations across the country to 
think through how do we adopt performance goals that are 
harmonized with software security guidance elsewhere so we 
ideally have one set of expectations or voluntary guidance for 
organizations, regardless if they are working with a Federal 
entity or the private sector.
    Mr. Garbarino. I appreciate the work that you are doing 
with industry here. So thank you.
    Mr. Gipson, in your opening statement you talked about the 
ability to identify high-consequence events and also eliminate 
their ability to happen. Where are we on that? I mean have we 
identified these high-consequence events? Or I know they 
probably change daily, but I mean do we have a baseline yet?
    Mr. Gipson. So I will speak to where we are with--and Idaho 
National Lab activity in partnership with the Department of 
Energy, the Department of Homeland Security, and the Department 
of Defense, we have been initially piloting and now 
operationalizing an effort we call--it is a mouthful--
consequence-driven cyber-informed engineering. So this is a 
process we go through with oftentimes asset owner and operators 
to train them on how to bring together those who work IT 
cybersecurity with those who work OT cybersecurity with the 
engineers and with the operators, all with a focus on securing 
the systems and the critical infrastructure from those high-
consequence events.
    So the first pilot occurred in 2017 and things have matured 
greatly since then and the program has been commercialized 
somewhat. So now it is spreading. So there is a path forward 
here, it just needs to grow.
    Mr. Garbarino. I imagine these high-consequence events are 
sector-specific. So what might be high-consequence event for 
one sector is not for another. So how do we get it to mature? 
What is the next step? Because it seems like we should be 
moving quickly on this to develop the list and then have that 
grow.
    Mr. Gipson. I could not agree with you more. Yes, this 
needs to move out more quickly.
    So this is where time back to the Department of Energy's 
National cyber-informed strategy comes in. DOE has a plan for 
how to reach the work force and the practitioners so that they 
start adopting the CIE activities. We have from the Lab worked 
with the National Risk Management Center to prioritize those 
critical infrastructure entities and various sectors. So there 
is a lot that Government has done, but this is a big change 
across the sector and needs to be funded either privately or 
through the Government.
    Mr. Garbarino. I appreciate that.
    Madam Chairman, I yield back.
    Thank you.
    Chairwoman Clarke. The Chair will recognize other Members 
for questions they may wish to ask the witnesses. In accordance 
with the guidelines laid out by the Chairman and the Ranking 
Member in their February 3 colloquy, I will recognize Members 
in order of seniority, alternating between Majority and 
Minority.
    Members are also reminded to unmute themselves when 
recognized for questioning.
    The Chair now recognizes the gentlewoman from New York, Ms. 
Rice, for 5 minutes.
    Ms. Rice. Thank you, Madam Chair.
    Mr. Goldstein, thank you so much for joining us. As has 
been said, it is great to hear from you again.
    Can you tell us what factors CISA takes into account when 
deciding whether a critical infrastructure operator should be 
allowed access to CISA's CyberSentry program?
    Mr. Goldstein. Of course. Thank you so much, ma'am. It is a 
wonderful question.
    So at the outset, our approach for gaining visibility into 
cyber threats targeting critical infrastructure is that every 
organization should adopt leading commercial solutions so that 
they themselves have visibility and can act quickly to detect 
and remediate possible intrusions into their network. That is 
something that we work closely with all of the leading security 
vendors to ensure that we are supporting them in providing 
access to the right companies in this country.
    Now, for a small number of critical entities across 
sectors, the U.S. Government has an operational need to get a 
more granular and near-real-time understanding into threats 
targeting control systems and operational technology. So the 
CyberSentry program is a set of commercial solutions that CISA 
provides to a constrained number of organizations across 
sectors where CISA's own analysts are able to gain visibility 
into cyber threats attempting to access and impact control 
systems and OT networks. Actually of course note that 
CyberSentry is a great partnership at Idaho National Labs.
    We really focus CyberSentry on those organizations that are 
most consequential to our National security, economic security, 
and public and health and safety, and where we reasonable 
expect targeting by advanced adversaries and where CISA's 
ability to operationalize sensitive information gives the 
company an added layer of security and allows CISA to quickly 
detect and assess if an advanced adversary is attempting an 
intrusion.
    So with the great support of Congress we look forward to 
expanding this program over the next fiscal year and beyond. 
But this program really is intended for those most 
consequential and most targeted entities in our country.
    Ms. Rice. How does CISA envision expanding the CyberSentry 
program to additional partners, as you mentioned in your 
technology? Is CyberSentry scalable to the extent that it can 
serve a larger number of systems, or does it need to remain 
focused only on those facing the greatest resource challenges?
    Mr. Goldstein. Our view is that CyberSentry really should 
remain focused on the most consequential and the most targeted 
entities in this country. Certainly we do intend to expand the 
program, both next fiscal year and beyond, and bring in more 
partners across sectors, but at the same time we are working 
very closely with commercial cybersecurity companies and with 
our partners in the Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative, such 
that we have layered ways to gain visibility into threats 
targeting critical infrastructure. So for those organizations 
that are part of CyberSentry, CISA will be able to gain our own 
visibility into threats targeting ICS and OT networks, but also 
at partnering with commercial cybersecurity companies and 
partnering directly with critical infrastructure. Through the 
Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative we are able to get similar 
visibility as well.
    So our goal is every organization should adopt 
cybersecurity detection and prevention capabilities, every 
organization should work with CISA to ensure that we are 
collaborating and sharing information for that top tranche of 
organizations most consequential, most at risk. That is where 
our CyberSentry tool is really useful even as it expands beyond 
the number of entities today.
    Ms. Rice. Great. Thank you so much.
    Programs like CyberSentry and the Joint Cyber Defense 
Collaborative play an important role in protecting our critical 
industrial control systems, but infrastructure operators must 
have access to a skilled and well-trained cyber work force of 
their own that understand the particular needs of OT security 
and how it differs from IT security.
    CISA's recent draft of IT-OT conversions report noted that 
only 68 qualified workers are available for every 100 
cybersecurity jobs and over 600,000 jobs open up for 
cybersecurity workers every year here in the United States. It 
is even more difficult to find cyber professionals that 
understand the OT environment.
    Mr. Gipson, how does the Idaho National Lab support Federal 
efforts to train a work force tailored specifically to OT 
environments and how quickly can a cyber professional trained 
to secure IT be trained to protect critical OT systems as well? 
How can this committee support Federal efforts to develop our 
OT security work force?
    Mr. Gipson. Thank you very much for that question.
    So Idaho National Lab has been involved in training the 
cybersecurity work force for decades at this point and 
specializing in the training of those who can do the 
operational technology cybersecurity.
    So to take someone who is already trained in information 
technology cybersecurity and train them to do operational 
technology, the principles are exactly the same. So it is not a 
state change for those individuals. What is different is the 
technical details of it, the data protocols, the 
vulnerabilities, the specific threats. So to take an IT person 
and turn them into an OT cybersecurity person, that is doable 
and Idaho National Lab does that routinely with CISA funding 
for many in the commercial work space.
    Now, to take those OT professionals and make them truly 
capable of securing critical infrastructure, it takes a lot 
more than simply the OT cybersecurity professional. We need to 
be able to train those engineers who are designing the systems, 
the operators who are running the systems, and encourage the 
collaboration of multiple parties to ensure cybersecurity. I 
know training does that, it forces collaboration and that 
collaboration is in many cases a culture change in companies 
and so that is the longer pole in the tent.
    Ms. Rice. Thank you to both of you witnesses for appearing 
here today.
    I yield back the balance of my time, Madam Chair.
    Thank you very much.
    Chairwoman Clarke. I thank the gentlelady from New York.
    The Chair now recognizes for 5 minutes the gentleman from 
Georgia, Mr. Clyde, for 5 minutes.
    Mr. Clyde. Thank you Chairwoman Clarke and Ranking Member 
Garbarino for holding this important hearing dedicated to 
improving the cybersecurity of our Nation's industrial control 
systems.
    Over the past few years we have witnessed numerous cyber 
attacks, both in the United States and abroad. Every day we see 
new technology on the market and new devices connecting to the 
internet. Unfortunately, it seems that at times our 
technological advances have outpaced our ability to maintain 
secure IT and OT systems. Cyber attacks can have devastating 
consequences, both for the consumer and for the system 
operators. However, many private industrial control system 
operators may not even be aware of the inherent risks involved 
when connecting their system to the internet.
    So, Mr. Goldstein, it is good to have you back for another 
hearing, sir. I know in the past we have asked you about the 
resources CISA has provided to help small businesses establish 
and improve cybersecurity measure with respect to information 
technology. Could you explain what services CISA provides to 
small businesses to maintain the security of operations 
technology? There are a lot of small businesses and a lot of 
them don't really have any idea what CISA does for OT.
    Mr. Goldstein. Yes, sir, absolutely. Thank you for that 
question. Of course, a pleasure to rejoin the group here.
    I really can't overstate the importance of CISA's regional 
work force here. For many small and medium organizations, even 
as we push out guidance on our website, on social media, via 
virtual meetings and webinars, we know that is not going to 
reach many organizations in this country. So with the support 
of Congress we are dramatically increasing our regional 
footprint across the country so that our regional cybersecurity 
experts can meet with local chambers of commerce, can knock on 
the door of the local water utility and have, as you note, sir, 
a really focused conversation about risks facing operational 
technology and control systems.
    This is really one important aspect of the cybersecurity 
performance goals, because the goal of the performance goals--
and other frameworks like it--is to provide a really succinct 
and simple place to start. So organizations that may not be 
resourced to develop a fully mature cybersecurity program, may 
not have resources to deploy best-in-class cybersecurity 
technologies, there are still steps that they can take that 
will dramatically improve their security today.
    So a combination of easy-to-use succinct guidance in our 
regional work force that is able to get out there, knock on 
doors, sit down for a cup of coffee and have a conversation, 
that is really our key to make sure that we are getting the 
word out the right ways.
    Mr. Clyde. OK. Thank you.
    So on a scale of say 1 to 10, where do you think we are 
right now in getting that information out for the small 
businesses to understand what CISA is really doing?
    Mr. Goldstein. Sir, I think it is asymmetric across 
sectors. I think that there are some sectors, for example, the 
energy sector, where there are of course a lot of electric co-
ops or municipal utilities that are smaller. I think CISA's 
work in cooperation with the energy department has really done 
an important job in driving an understanding of risks and an 
understanding of controls. I think if we look across other 
sectors, for example, thousands upon thousands of small water 
utilities in this country, I think we have work to do to make 
sure that we are identifying all possible means of 
communication and collaboration to, as my co-witness noted, 
raise an understanding of the risk in the first instance, so 
that organizations don't, for example, just plug a device into 
the internet without understanding the risk thereof, and we are 
driving adoption of the reg controls and security measures that 
are done in a way that is considering the unique attributes of 
OT environment and the requirements for availability and 
operational risk therein.
    Mr. Clyde. Thank you. Thank you very much for that.
    Now, Mr. Gipson, in your testimony, you said from our 
decades-long work in building and testing more than 50 nuclear 
reactors in the high desert of Idaho Falls, the Idaho National 
Lab has developed a deep understanding of OT and cybersecurity 
engineering processes needed to secure systems and provide 
critical function assurance.
    With proper safeguards in place, and one of those being 
operational technology security, nuclear reactor energy is, you 
know, one of the most clean and reliable sources of electricity 
in the world. Having that incredible amount of experience in, 
you know, building over 50 nuclear reactors, would you agree 
that nuclear reactor energy is perfectly safe with the proper 
safeguards in place?
    Mr. Gipson. Well, I will caveat it with saying I am not a 
nuclear engineer or a scientist, but, yes, modern nuclear 
reactors are incredibly safe. Their design is nothing like the 
nuclear reactors of the past.
    Mr. Clyde. OK, great. Do you think we need more nuclear 
reactor capability in this country?
    Mr. Gipson. So, once again, away from my area of expertise. 
Yes. Having that baseline generation available in a clean and 
reliable source like nuclear is an incredible opportunity to 
take advantage of and really there is not technical reason why 
we shouldn't move out rapidly.
    Mr. Clyde. Well, I will tell you, you know, in Georgia we 
have two nuclear plants coming on-line in Plant Vogtle just 
literally months away, just--early next year the second plant, 
just a few weeks away from the first plant and I am really 
excited about that.
    Chairwoman Clarke. The gentleman's time has expired.
    Mr. Clyde. Thank you and I yield back.
    Chairwoman Clarke. The Chair now recognizes for 5 minutes 
the gentleman from New York, Mr. Torres.
    Mr. Torres. Thank you, Madam Chair. Good to see you again, 
Mr. Goldstein.
    The Federal Government must not only preach but also 
practice cybersecurity, it must lead by example. So with that 
in mind, does the Federal Government have full visibility in to 
the OT assets it owns and operations?
    Mr. Goldstein. Thank you, sir. Wonderful to see you as 
well.
    The Federal Government is making extraordinary strides in 
getting visibility across the IT and OT landscape. The key to 
this is our Continuous Diagnostic and Mitigation, or CDM, 
program which has been supported by Congress for many years and 
provides really two key elements. First, it funds cybersecurity 
tools for all Federal Civilian Executive Branch agencies to 
enable that asset visibility and understand the state of 
assets, configurations, and vulnerabilities, and then also 
provide CISA an on-going feed to what we call our Federal 
dashboard to get visibility into the State of assets across the 
Federal Civilian Executive Branch. In part by President Biden's 
cybersecurity Executive Order last year, we have made 
extraordinary progress and now have increasingly high 
confidence in the state of asset visibility across Federal 
agencies. Now, we are still working every day to identify gaps 
in that coverage, make sure that we are catching what we call 
shadow IT, instances of IT and OT assets that might be missed 
by on-going----
    Mr. Torres. It sounds like the answer is no, you don't have 
full visibility. I am curious pursuant to NSTAC's 
recommendation, is CISA willing to invoke its binding 
operational directive to mandate visibility into Federal OT 
assets or?
    Mr. Goldstein. Sir, we have better visibility than we have 
ever had in the history of the Federal Government. What I would 
say is any organization conclusively saying they have absolute 
confidence, I don't think any entity would say that, but we 
have better visibility than we have had. We are making progress 
every day on----
    Mr. Torres. But are you willing to invoke the authority you 
have to mandate visibility?
    Mr. Goldstein. Unequivocally we will use every authority at 
our disposal to make sure that we have the visibility we need.
    Mr. Torres. You noted earlier that the National Security 
Memorandum on improving critical infrastructure requires you 
and NIST to set both cross-sector and sector specific 
performance goals. What are time lines for finalizing both of 
those goals?
    Mr. Goldstein. Yes, sir. We are planning to release the 
next iteration of the baseline performance goals in October 
during cybersecurity awareness month. We are really excited 
about this opportunity first to get these goals out in the 
community and help owner-operators start using them for their 
risk management, but also to keep getting feedback.
    Mr. Torres. What is the time table?
    Mr. Goldstein. We are releasing the baseline goals in 
October, sir, and then from that point we are going to start 
working on the sectoral goals. We are going to----
    Mr. Torres. Is there a time table for finalizing the 
sectoral goals, or?
    Mr. Goldstein. We are going to do them in tranches, sir. So 
we are going to start off with a few sectors off the bat. I 
think the time frame is going to differ by sector. We will see 
some sectors where the baseline goals may largely be 
sufficient, those will be finalized faster. Other sectors that 
have more unique technologies may take longer. But as to the 
baseline goals, this will be deeply collaborative in 
coordination with the private sector and our partners across 
the inter-agency.
    Mr. Torres. Now, as you know well, there are 16 sectors of 
critical infrastructure, and in addition to partnering with 
sector risk management agencies, CISA itself is a SRMA. Remind 
me how many agencies or sectors fall within your portfolio?
    Mr. Goldstein. Eight, sir.
    Mr. Torres. Eight?
    Mr. Goldstein. Yes, sir.
    Mr. Torres. Is that manageable given the constraints of 
your agency? There are some agencies that only have one sector 
to oversee, you have eight of them.
    Mr. Goldstein. Yes, sir. CISA has unique capacity for both 
cyber and physical risk management. It is of course the calling 
and mission of our agency, and so we do work closely to support 
and enable further maturation of each sector for which we are 
the SRMA.
    Mr. Torres. Of the eight sectors, which one would you 
identify is the most target-rich and resource-poor?
    Mr. Goldstein. Sir, there is a variety. I would note 
certainly sectors like the dam sector, like critical 
manufacturing, given its diversity, and even emergency services 
are sectors where we know that adversaries have expressed 
interest. A need for maturation is of course on-going.
    Mr. Torres. I have read the press releases about the 100 
days cybersecurity sprints, but it seems like there is no real 
transparency around them. There has been no reporting regarding 
the results of these sprints.
    So what have been the--do you intend to report the failures 
and successes of these sprints or the lessons learned from 
them?
    Mr. Goldstein. So, sir, because the sprints derived from 
the President's NSM, I will defer to the White House for any 
reporting.
    What I will say in this forum is we have seen different 
successes for each sprint based upon the diversity of entities 
involved in each. So as one example, for our pipeline sprint we 
saw that sprint derive much deeper collaboration between major 
pipeline companies the Federal Government. We have now stood up 
within the Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative a new cyber 
defense planning effort with the Nation's largest pipelines 
that we would not have been able to achieve without the 
catalyzing force of these cybersecurity sprints.
    For the water sprint, we were able to get an increasing 
number of companies signed up for our voluntary cyber hygiene 
vulnerability scanning services and were able to get more water 
entities interested in and signed up for CyberSentry.
    So we at CISA certainly are seeing benefit and value from 
these sprints, but the value is different inherently based upon 
the different nature of the entities involved for each.
    Mr. Torres. I see my time has expired, so.
    Chairwoman Clarke. I thank the gentleman from New York.
    The Chair now recognizes for 5 minutes the gentleman from 
Mississippi, Mr. Guest.
    Mr. Guest. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
    I first want to thank both of you individuals for joining 
us today for this hearing.
    Mr. Gipson, in your written testimony that you submitted, I 
think you did a great job summarizing the difference between 
the risk associated with IT and OT technology. For those who 
may be watching this hearing who may be, as I am at times, 
technologically challenged, can you kind-of walk through that 
since they don't have the benefit of what I have in front of me 
of the differences and the risk associated with those different 
systems. Very quickly.
    Mr. Gipson. Of course. Thank you for the opportunity again.
    So as I ran through in my testimony, the IT and OT are 
different in a number of ways, specifically the ones I wanted 
to highlight was that IT is typically upgraded to replace every 
3 to 5 years, software and firmware is frequently updated and 
patches are routinely installed, whereas with operational 
technology, because that is designed to in many cases last 
decades, those systems are often only updated every--whenever 
there is a noticeable failure. So very large difference in how 
modern the systems are.
    When it comes to the standardization, there is existing 
guidance, cybersecurity best practices widely available for IT 
that many practitioners are trained in, whereas with 
operational technology, that simply does not exist.
    Then finally, when it comes to cybersecurity tools, I 
mentioned discovery tools, but it is not only that, it is the 
ability to do things like intrusion detection, network 
analysis, widely available on the information technology side, 
but still very rare on the operational technology side. So 
there is a lot that still needs to happen to mature not only 
the practice of operational technology, but all of the support 
that goes with it that will come from industry. That needs to 
happen in parallel with training that operational technology, 
cybersecurity work force and training many others involved in 
critical infrastructure on what to know about cybersecurity.
    Mr. Guest. Then you continue on page 3 and you talk about 
vulnerabilities, specifically I believe to OT systems. You talk 
about vulnerabilities being inherent in the systems themselves, 
but you say that they are also introduced by adversaries 
through supply chain operations.
    Can you talk a little bit about supply chain operations and 
how adversaries are able to exploit systems through that 
mechanism?
    Mr. Gipson. Yes. So when I speak of inherent 
vulnerabilities, that is what comes in, a piece of hardware, a 
piece of software, poor design, poor coding, mistakes people 
make, things that are errors that we didn't know at the time 
the device or service was created. They are inherent to the 
product.
    Externally introduced is something that an adversary does 
to put a vulnerability into a product. That can happen anywhere 
along the supply chain. At the point of manufacture an 
adversary can introduce a vulnerability into a component or a 
system. At the point of shipping, an adversary can do that same 
thing. So along that supply chain are equipment, the component 
in the systems sometimes are exposed to adversaries who can 
manipulate them and introduce those vulnerabilities. Then 
likewise, because not everything in any system is developed in-
house, there are other products that are introduced and 
incorporated into systems as they are designed and built. Each 
of those products has that same exposure to supply chain 
vulnerabilities.
    So it is a remarkably difficult problem to know the entire 
supply chain, let alone secure the entire supply chain for a 
system.
    Mr. Guest. There have been recent efforts by Congress to 
move some of those manufacturers of some of these critical 
components back to the United States. As we see that 
legislation becomes successful, as we see these companies move 
back from foreign nations, particularly China, back to the 
United States, do you think that that will help with this 
supply chain issue that you have referred to here in your 
report?
    Mr. Gipson. I believe that will help. That is one piece of 
what needs to be done to help better secure the supply chain. 
It is a broad-based large problem, an issue that needs to be 
widely addressed.
    Mr. Guest. Thank you.
    Madam Chairman, I believe I am out of time, so I will yield 
back.
    Chairwoman Clarke. I thank the gentleman from Mississippi.
    We are going to enter into a second round of questioning at 
this time. This is a very important subject matter, something 
that we are trying to wrap our brains around and you two have 
the expertise to really get us where we need to be in terms of 
our vision for what we can do here from the Committee on 
Homeland Security.
    So as I said in my statement, I believe we need to revamp 
our playbook for securing OT and the common baseline 
performance goals that CISA is developing might create a 
foundation to do just that, but only if CISA gets it right by 
working with the stakeholders to make sure that goals are 
effective, translated across sectors, and address the unique 
needs of OT operators.
    So let me just ask, Mr. Goldstein, what mechanisms does 
CISA have in place to engage with stakeholders and solicit 
feedback? Is CISA proactively seeking new untapped stakeholder 
groups who may have novel insight to share?
    Mr. Goldstein. Yes, ma'am, absolutely.
    As you note, very correctly, the baseline performance goals 
are voluntary by intent and design and the only way that 
organizations will use these goals to advance their own risk 
management and drive investment toward the most important 
security outcomes is if they are seen as credible, as valid, as 
helpful.
    The only way we can achieve that is through a collaborative 
process in development. We have gone through two rounds of 
robust stakeholder feedback, both of which included public 
review. We received, remarkably, over 2,000 comments on the 
cybersecurity performance goals and held a variety of 
workshops, including both for sectoral partners and the general 
public, as well as listening sessions across our stakeholder 
groups.
    Now, the point you raise, ma'am, is really important 
because one goal here we had was to make sure that we are 
getting input not just from the stakeholders who we talk to at 
CISA everyday, but also a diversity of individuals and groups 
with unique views. So we reached out uniquely to our 
international partners, to academia, to researchers, to owner-
operators, device manufacturers, integrators, entities, across 
the spectrum.
    Really importantly here, even after we released the next 
iteration of the baseline performance goals, our work on these 
goals isn't done, because we understand that as organizations 
begin to use these baseline goals in practice, they are likely 
to have observations and feedback that will help us make these 
even more useful. So our intent is to leave the door open for 
feedback on these baseline goals and actually do a fairly agile 
revision and update cycle so we can keep getting input and keep 
improving these again so organizations can use these on a 
voluntary basis with frameworks, like the NIST cybersecurity 
framework, to advance their risk management and measurement 
thereof.
    Chairwoman Clarke. It is good to hear that there is on-
going exchange taking place, because this is an ever-evolving 
threat and need to really keep up to speed.
    Now, for the sprints, CISA is in a supporting role to the 
sector research management agencies. How does CISA adjust that 
support based on the capacity and expertise of each SRMA?
    Mr. Goldstein. Yes, ma'am.
    So CISA is a source of expertise and cybersecurity risk 
reduction services, two critical sectors with and through the 
various SRMAs. As you know correctly, the level and type of 
support that we offer varies not only by the SRMA, but also by 
the sector itself. So in the context of the cyber sprints 
directive by the President's National Security Memorandum, for 
sectors, for example, like the pipeline sector, where many 
organizations have well-resourced security programs, you know, 
our level of support was different and actually providing, you 
know, more guidance, more coordination, and now really moving 
toward on-going operational collaboration to help more quickly 
identify and respond to emerging threats, risks, and 
vulnerabilities.
    Conversely, for the water sector, given the over 50,000 
water entities in this country, many of which are dramatically 
resource-constrained in cybersecurity, our role is really 
different. Our role is thinking through how we can help them 
provide capabilities, provide services, or for public entities, 
through our new SLTT Cyber Grant Program, actually provide them 
resources to improve their programs. So the heterogeneity of 
sectors does call for a different level of support from CISA 
depending on the partners we are working with.
    Chairwoman Clarke. Then, finally, I know CISA wants to 
expand the CyberSentry to new partners. What is stopping you 
from doing that faster?
    Mr. Goldstein. Yes, ma'am.
    So the expansion of CyberSentry is on-going. We have gotten 
wonderful feedback on this program from the partners who are on 
board today, with the support of Congress, both resourcing and 
authorizing the program in the past year. We will be expanding 
throughout fiscal year 2023. We do want to be thoughtful and 
rigorous about the entities to whom we expand to make sure that 
they meet our requirements for consequentiality and risk and 
also that they are able to make best use of this program in 
conjunction with the commercial solutions that they already 
have deployed.
    Chairwoman Clarke. Very well.
    We have been joined by one of our colleagues who wasn't 
with us in the first round but is now here with us, Mr.--
Ranking Member, I am just going to--yes. I am going to--the 
Chair now recognizes for 5 minutes the gentleman from Kansas, 
Mr. LaTurner.
    Mr. LaTurner. Thank you, Madam Chair. I appreciate it.
    With the increase in prevalence of internet of things 
devices and connections between OT and IT systems, the cyber 
risk faced by our Nation will surely grow. I am sure we all 
heard from constituents about this threat and about attacks 
that have crippled vital businesses in our districts. In 
Kansas, 10 FSB officers hacked into a nuclear power plant in my 
district in 2017, and while they did not gain access to the 
cyber systems that operate the facility, the attack makes clear 
the importance of increasing our cybersecurity capability so 
that utilities can operate as a partner for the defense of the 
Nation.
    In order for utilities to perform that role as expected by 
Government, they need timely and actionable information that 
they can take and respond to effectively. I appreciate the work 
that both CISA and INL are doing to meet those needs of 
industry and would like to thank each of our witnesses for 
being here today and sharing your expertise.
    Mr. Gipson, you shared in your testimony about the 
importance of cyber physical test environments, like INL's 
control environment laboratory resource. How can industry 
partners like the nuclear plant in my district better leverage 
test ranges, like CELR?
    Mr. Gipson. Thank you. It is a wonderful thought.
    The CELR, or that test range, think of that as a scaled 
version of a representative test range where practitioners, 
individuals can learn how to secure the operational technology 
while simultaneously seeing the physical system that is being 
controlled. So this is done at a scaled-down model size.
    Now, it is wonderful because it helps see and visualize not 
only the cyber activity but also the physical results of any 
cyber mitigation. Now, it is even better if those same sorts of 
activities can be done at life-size scale. At Idaho National 
Lab we have that life-size scale. You know, the place is big, 
it is 890 square miles. That is 13 times the size of 
Washington, DC. We have a test bed for electricity, a small 
water test bed, some other things. But there is no mechanism 
right now to open that up to public use without specific 
funding, either by private entities or more often, more 
normally, the Government.
    Mr. LaTurner. I appreciate that.
    I understand INL hosts an ICS community of practice that 
brings together ICS professionals across the Government, 
academia, and the industry. Is this group focused on the energy 
sector specifically?
    Mr. Gipson. No. ICS, industrial control system, community 
of practice is broader and it welcomes practitioners from all 
sectors. It is over a couple of hundred participating members 
now that is driving the maturation and training of ICS among 
those practitioners.
    So that is an opportunity for collaboration that is easily 
grown as more learn of its existence and how it can benefit 
them.
    Mr. LaTurner. Talk to me--I don't have a ton of time left, 
but it is so important--what efforts are under way with the COP 
on work force development and increasing the talent pipeline in 
OT cybersecurity?
    Mr. Gipson. So this is where Idaho National Lab spends a 
lot of effort. The training and development of that 
cybersecurity, and especially the operational technology 
cybersecurity work force. There are a variety of classes 
offered that can be attended either in-person or virtually that 
allow the hands-on learning of what it takes to secure critical 
infrastructure.
    As I mentioned earlier, one of the great things about the 
offerings is that it allows the collaboration, and in many 
cases forces the collaboration beyond what the operational 
technology cybersecurity person normally does. That is critical 
to being able to secure cyber physical systems.
    Now, in addition to those courses that are available to 
anyone--CISA funds many of those--through the development of 
courses for particular sponsors, like those within the 
Department of Defense and other areas, and in those cases we 
try to train the trainer so that it can be easily grown and 
expanded upon.
    Mr. LaTurner. Thank you.
    I yield back, Madam Chair.
    Chairwoman Clarke. I thank the gentleman.
    I now recognize our Ranking Member, the gentleman from New 
York, Mr. Garbarino, for any additional questions he may have.
    Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Chairwoman.
    Again, thank you to the witnesses for being here today.
    Mr. Gipson, can you speak--we have--I don't think we have 
touched on it really at all today, but can you speak in greater 
detail about National Lab's Malcolm Tool and, you know, how are 
CISA and other organizations, Government organizations 
utilizing this and other tools like this?
    Mr. Gipson. Thank you for that.
    Malcolm, for those who aren't familiar, is an open-source 
analysis framework. The beauty of that is it is open source. 
Anyone can download the code, it is available on GitHub, and it 
allows those practitioners in cybersecurity to have a tool set 
to be able to better analyze that operational technology 
network data.
    So as I mentioned in my testimony, these types of tools are 
widely available for IT cybersecurity professionals and 
analysts, but not so much on the OT side. So with CISA's 
funding, that Malcolm capability has been made available to 
everyone in the world.
    Mr. Garbarino. Is there room for a tool like this to go to 
the OT side? Is that possible or not really?
    Mr. Gipson. No, in fact Malcolm is available for the OT 
side. I mean emphasize that while there are many tools 
available from vendors to analyze IT data, not as many on the 
OT side. This is where Malcolm fills a gap and can help those 
analysts manipulate the data to be used in other IT available 
tools.
    Mr. Garbarino. Mr. Goldstein, is there a way--how do we get 
more people to use this tool and similar tools like it? I mean 
is it something that we just need to educate people of its 
existence and then hopefully they use it? Or what thoughts do 
you have?
    Mr. Goldstein. Yes, absolutely.
    So just to echo the good points of my co-witness, 
developing these sorts of open-source tools that meet specific 
security needs of the ICS and OT community is a key effort for 
both CISA and our colleagues at INL. So, you know, Malcolm is a 
wonderful tool. There are more to come. We continue to evaluate 
requirements and then develop and release as open source new 
tools that fulfill known gaps in the community.
    To your point, sir, these tools are not useful if they are 
not being used. So part of our effort is to make sure that 
through efforts like INL's ICS community of practice, but also 
through groups that we sponsor at CISA, like the ICS joint 
working group that every year puts together thousands of 
practitioners around the world in this pace, as well as frankly 
being out there on the conference circuit, speaking at the 
events like the S4 Conference every year and making sure that 
we are evangelizing the usefulness of these tools to 
organizations and practitioners. That is really key so that 
they can actually drive down risk in practice.
    Mr. Garbarino. Would it make sense to make this--we have 
this as you said the State and local grant applications, could 
CISA require to be able to get access to these grants 
utilization of some of these tools as part of the application? 
Would that help it expand use?
    Mr. Goldstein. Certainly we are thinking carefully through 
how we can utilize the grant program in the future to 
incentivize adoption of the right security measures and 
controls for many organizations that will be utilizing our 
grant programs. There are likely more foundational investments 
that will help them get to the point where they can use a tool 
like Malcolm more effectively.
    Mr. Garbarino. I appreciate both your answers on this and 
look forward to hearing about more tools in the future.
    So thank you very much and I yield back.
    Chairwoman Clarke. I thank the gentleman, our Ranking 
Member, for his questions.
    We have been joined by some additional colleagues and I 
want to give them an opportunity to ask their questions at this 
time.
    So the Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Texas, Ms. 
Sheila Jackson Lee, for her questions at this time.
    Ms. Jackson Lee. Madam Chair, I am passing at this time. 
Thank you.
    Chairwoman Clarke. Very well.
    I will then recognize the gentleman from Rhode Island, Mr. 
Langevin, for 5 minutes.
    Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Madam Chair.
    I want to thank our witnesses for their testimony today and 
what they are doing to better secure the country in cyber 
space. I deeply appreciate your efforts.
    I wanted to follow up on a discussion that had taken place 
a little while ago about using binding operational directive 
authority requiring executive civilian branch departments and 
agencies to inventory the OT assets under their control as the 
NSTAC recommended in its related report to the President on IT 
OT convergence.
    So my question is how well-resourced is CISA to support 
compliance with such a directive and integrate agency 
information about OT assets into its responsibilities as the 
operational lead for Federal cybersecurity?
    Mr. Goldstein. Thank you, sir. Of course, a privilege to 
see you as always.
    I will answer that in two parts. At the outset, the way 
that we have designed our continuous diagnostic and mitigation 
program is that agencies have the tools and have the 
connectivity with CISA's Federal dashboard to provide that 
asset visibility, both at the agency level and at a more 
aggregated level to CISA with the ability for CISA also to do 
deeper analytics into what we call object-level data, the 
characteristics of specific devices running on a network. We 
have a robust team at CISA focused exclusively at drafting, 
issuing, but then ensuring adherence to our binding operational 
directives. One key threshold criteria for issuance of a 
directive under our authorities at CISA is an assessment of our 
ability to measure adherence and ensure appropriate escalation 
with agencies if adherence does not meet our requirements.
    So as we evaluate the use of our authorities to ensure 
appropriate asset visibility across both IT and OT assets, that 
will be top of mind. Our sense is today that we do have the 
technology and governance in place to enable that adherence if 
and when we do utilize such authorities.
    Mr. Langevin. OK. Thank you for clarifying that.
    Of course finding solutions to the OT visibility problem 
should not exclude private-sector critical infrastructure 
owners and operators. To both of our witnesses, I wanted to 
ask, what are some of the major impediments right now facing 
critical infrastructure owners and operators and their Federal 
partners in cataloging OT assets and instances of IT-OT 
convergence? What can Congress do to help overcome those 
impediments?
    Mr. Goldstein. Yes, sir, I will offer a thought and 
certainly welcome views from my co-witness.
    You know, at the outset, a through line throughout this 
hearing has been the important differences between IT 
management and IT cybersecurity versus the control systems and 
OT environment. I think one example of this is for most IT 
practitioners and cybersecurity professionals, you know, IT 
asset management is considered to be a foundational enabler of 
cybersecurity. To that end, there are a variety of tools and 
solutions in place to enable that visibility. Transposing those 
sorts of tools directly onto control systems and OT 
environments is non trivial and in fact may not be fit for 
purpose given the unique aspect of control systems and OT 
environments.
    Additionally, the individuals or teams accountable for IT 
asset management in a given organization may be quite different 
from the ones who are managing the OT environment. So two key 
steps are to ensure that there a resolutions available for OT 
asset management that take into account the unique attributes 
of control systems and operational technology and that there is 
convergence between the teams, the individuals who are 
accountable for asset management to ensure that IT security and 
OT security are considered together given the unique linkages 
between those environments.
    Mr. Langevin. OK. Thank you.
    Let me turn now finally to OT cybersecurity work force 
development. Critical infrastructure cybersecurity, especially 
as it pertains to the security of the industrial control 
systems requires a work force with specific skills that aren't 
always identical for those needed for traditional IT 
cybersecurity.
    So to be sure traditional IT cybersecurity skills are 
valuable for a critical infrastructure cybersecurity operator 
to have, but equally importantly I think those operators must 
have an understanding of the engineering principles underlying 
specific ICS devices and the systems they control, as well as 
the knowledge of how to maintain physical and environmental 
safety in the operation of such devices. Have you seen 
challenges in this critical infrastructure owners and operators 
ability to attract ICS cybersecurity talent with expertise in 
each of these areas? Are the opportunities for the Federal 
Government and Congress specifically to support the development 
of these skills across the ICS cybersecurity work force?
    Mr. Goldstein. Yes, sir. This absolutely is an area of 
urgent focus and concern. My co-witness outlined some of the 
important work from Idaho National Labs to address this delta, 
but certainly we know that our Nation is facing a real 
workforce crisis in the cybersecurity work force generally. As 
you well note, sir, these specialized skills to operation 
control systems or OT cybersecurity environment are even more 
specialized and require an understanding not only of 
cybersecurity but also of the unique operational considerations 
that are inherent in control systems and OT.
    CISA is working closely with partners, including INL, 
including our colleagues at DOE, to provide curricula, courses, 
hands-on training, to address this gap, but we need to do more. 
Certainly as control systems and OT become more and more 
ubiquitous and relied upon across sectors, this will be an area 
where the Federal Government, the private sector, academia, and 
with the support of Congress, we really need to invest and 
focus.
    Mr. Langevin. Very good.
    Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you to our witnesses for 
their testimony.
    I yield back.
    Chairwoman Clarke. So I wish to thank the witnesses for 
their valuable testimony and the Members for their questions 
today.
    The Members of the subcommittee may have additional 
questions for the witnesses and we ask that you respond 
expeditiously in writing to those questions.
    The Chair reminds Members--it looks as though we do have 
another question from--we are working hybrid here, so I did 
recognize that our chair--excuse me, Congresswoman Sheila 
Jackson Lee of Texas is now recognized for 5 minutes. Excuse 
me. Congresswoman Lee, I think you need to unmute. We can't 
hear you, can you unmute?
    Ms. Jackson Lee. Can I be heard now?
    Chairwoman Clarke. Yes, you can.
    Ms. Jackson Lee. All right. Well, let me just say that 
hybrid is certainly helpful, but challenging sometimes.
    To the witnesses, let me thank you for your testimony. To 
Madam Chair, thank you and Ranking Member for very important 
hearing. Members are detained in other matters and I did want 
to make sure in this important hearing I raise two questions.
    So I would like the witnesses to answer them as they are 
able to do so.
    We have been working with the issue of industrial 
infrastructure for a very long time. I remember chairing the 
Transportation Security Committee, which had infrastructure as 
part of its jurisdiction. Really, in the old days, if you will, 
we had not reached the level of fear or apprehension about 
cyber attacks. They were probably more physical attacks as 
relates to industrial infrastructure. But I would like to ask 
the level of threat, the level or the rate of threats you think 
are to America's industrial infrastructure. What level are we 
at? How can we educate the industrial community--I think some 
are more informed than others--on the level of threat?
    Secondarily, as relates to the work force, are you working 
with historically Black colleges, Hispanic-serving institutions 
to help them steer toward programs that would help build the 
work force?
    If those who are able to answer those questions to do so, I 
would appreciate it. I thank the Chair for her indulgence.
    Mr. Goldstein. Thank you, ma'am.
    On the first question, the level of threat facing control 
systems and operational technology is significant. I will call 
particular attention to the variety of products that CISA and 
our partners released during our Shields Up campaign subsequent 
to Russia's unprovoked invasion of Ukraine, which included 
advisories focused on threats to, for example, programmable 
logic controllers, interval power supplies, and similar 
technology widely used in the ICS and OT context. We know that 
the consequentiality of an intrusion into these systems is very 
significant and therefore we must be concerned about steps to 
ensure their security and resilience under all conditions.
    On the second question, ma'am, absolutely. You know, as 
much as we need to address the cybersecurity work force gap in 
this country, we need a cybersecurity work force that reflects 
the diversity of America. So at CISA we are deeply focused on 
working with HBCUs, with MSIs. We are excited to host our 
upcoming CISA Cyber Summit in October with a number of HBCUs in 
the Atlanta, Georgia area in coordination with those entities 
to ensure that we have a pipeline that dramatically changes. 
The diversity of our cyber work force is foundational to our 
strategy.
    Ms. Jackson Lee. I think I still have a little bit of time.
    I think many of us would be very much interested in a 
summit of that form. Are you suggesting that colleges outside 
of Atlanta can come? Or otherwise would you reach my office? I 
think the southwest region sometimes gets overlooked and we 
have a sizable population of historically Black colleges in the 
region and would like to offer that region, and Houston in 
particular, for another site for such a summit. Because this is 
crucial to help build the platforms of programs that colleges 
can begin to start with to help assist in the work force 
development going forward.
    Mr. Goldstein. Yes, ma'am. I am confident that we value the 
chance to work with HBCUs and MSIs in your district and will 
certainly follow up with your team.
    Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you so very much.
    Madam Chair, I thank you so very much for this hearing and 
I yield back.
    Chairwoman Clarke. Before we close, I am going to give one 
more opportunity. Anyone virtually who has any questions at 
this time and wishes to be recognized?
    Very well.
    With that, I thank you once again. I thank our witnesses 
for your valuable testimony and the Members for their 
questions. The Chair reminds Members that the subcommittee 
record will remain open for 10 business days.
    Without objection, the subcommittee stands adjourned.
    [Whereupon, at 11:28 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]



                            A P P E N D I X

                              ----------                              

     Questions From Chairwoman Yvette D. Clarke for Eric Goldstein
    Question 1a. CISA has published a fact sheet supporting and 
prioritizing the migration to post-quantum cryptography for public and 
private entities. Given that National Critical Functions (NCFs) are 
reliant on ICSs, how can Congress support CISA's efforts to provide 
additional targeted guidance to NCFs that require more aide?
    Question 1b. Can CISA provide a list of NCFs that require the most 
aide based on level of priority?
    Question 1c. What additional resources are shared with SRMAs to 
provide support as the entities transition to post-quantum 
cryptography?
    Answer. The transition to post-quantum cryptography (PQC) requires 
that the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) 
standardize the new algorithms that have been developed to resist 
attack by a cryptographically-relevant quantum computer. These 
algorithms are not yet standardized and therefore not included in 
commercially-available systems for ready adoption by critical 
infrastructure owners and operators. As PQC proceeds through the 
standardization process at NIST and more PQC algorithms appear in 
systems that owners and operators can adopt, the Cybersecurity and 
Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) will achieve a better 
understanding of which sectors and functions need greater aid and 
support to transition to PQC.
    CISA and NIST recently held an all-sector call with a large number 
of critical infrastructure cybersecurity executives to inform them of 
the upcoming transition to PQC and recommend that they conduct an 
internal inventory of their current cryptosystems to better understand 
the scope of what their organizations will need to transition.
    CISA has highlighted several National Critical Functions that are 
dependent on ICS and may benefit from additional support to prepare for 
and execute the migration to post-quantum cryptography:
   Generate Electricity
   Distribute Electricity
   Transmit Electricity
   Transport Cargo and Passengers by Rail
   Transport Cargo and Passengers by Vessel
   Transport Materials by Pipeline
   Transport Passengers by Mass Transit
   Manage Hazardous Materials
   Manage Wastewater
   Store Fuel and Maintain Reserves
   Exploration and Extraction of Fuels
   Fuel Refining and Processing Fuels
   Manufacture Equipment
   Produce and Provide Agricultural Products and Services
   Produce and Provide Human and Animal Food Products and 
        Services
   Produce Chemicals
   Provide Metals and Materials
   Supply Water
   Provide Internet-Based Content, Information, and 
        Communication Services
   Provide Identity Management and Associated Trust Support 
        Services
   Provide Information Technology Products and Services
   Protect Sensitive Information.
    CISA continues to partner closely with NIST, other U.S. Government 
partners, and private-sector partners to support a smooth transition to 
post-quantum cryptography, as called for in National Security 
Memorandum-10, when new standards are available.
  Questions From Ranking Member Andrew R. Garbarino for Eric Goldstein
    Question 1. A major challenge public and private-sector critical 
infrastructure owners and operators face is balancing the priorities of 
enhancing security and modernizing legacy equipment. There are 
sensitivities around when certain devices on the network can be taken 
off-line for updates versus when they need to be on-line and operating. 
With the introduction of new regulations and guidelines related to 
industrial control system (ICS) modernization and security, 
organizations are forced to make difficult decisions.
    Understanding these difficulties, can you describe how CISA is 
partnering with its Federal agency partners to provide owners and 
operators with assistance in market research to better understand what 
resources are available to assist with these common issues?
    Answer. CISA has received substantial input during stakeholder 
outreach activities in support of the development of cybersecurity 
performance goals for critical infrastructure that echoes the challenge 
you have outlined. CISA's primary forum for engaging with interagency 
counterparts on the topic of modernization is the monthly Control 
Systems Interagency Working Group. Additionally, CISA leads a Control 
Systems Working Group that brings together both industry and 
interagency representatives to talk through ICS challenges. Going 
forward, CISA intends to use both bodies, as well as the activities 
associated with our roll-out of the cybersecurity performance goals, as 
opportunities to both garner feedback and share recommendations and 
best practices with the community on how to safely and effectively 
approach modernization.
    As an example, CISA has worked with the U.S. Department of Energy 
(DOE) to support market research, including through publication of 
recommended considerations for organizations seeking to adopt and 
deploy ICS/operational technology (OT) monitoring solutions. These 
recommendations consist of a vendor-agnostic framing of capabilities 
and feature-sets, which CISA and DOE believe to be most critical in 
ensuring the procured tool delivers value to the adopter and 
meaningfully reduces risk to ICS/OT assets.
    Another example of support that can aid in market research for ICS 
investment are the recently published Cybersecurity Performance Goals 
(CPGs) for Critical Infrastructure. These goals were developed as a 
minimum baseline of cybersecurity activities for critical 
infrastructure, that should inform where organizations should 
prioritize resource investments for the most effective reduction of 
cyber risk. While the goals themselves are vendor and platform-
agnostic, they do inform what practices organizations should be 
implementing.
    Question 2a. Core to CISA's mission is gaining centralized, 
holistic visibility across Federal Civilian Executive Branch (FCEB) 
networks. Recognizing that you can't secure what you can't see, the 
fiscal year 2022 Consolidated Appropriations Act included $65 million 
in CISA funds for ``attack surface management and National 
vulnerability incident response.'' The accompanying House report for 
this funding appropriately recognizes that, ``Unlike DoD, CISA remains 
heavily dependent on manual self-reporting for situational awareness of 
internet-facing attack surfaces, creating a fractured and inaccurate 
snapshot of vulnerabilities in the Federal civilian cybersecurity 
ecosystem.'' Effective execution of these fiscal year 2022 funds could 
finally give CISA continuous visibility over the entirety of the 
internet-facing FCEB attack surface through the eyes of the adversary.
    Recognizing Congressional intent, what is CISA's plan to execute 
the $65 million of fiscal year 2022 funds? How much of those funds have 
been executed to date?
    Question 2b. In line with the direction of the report language, how 
is CISA evaluating state-of-the-art commercial solutions?
    Question 2c. Are the lessons from successes elsewhere in Government 
standing up similar attack surface management programs being 
appropriately incorporated into CISA's plans?
    Answer. CISA remains appreciative of Congress' on-going support of 
the Agency's cybersecurity mission, including support of enhanced 
visibility into threats targeting the internet-facing Federal Civilian 
Executive Branch attack surface.
    CISA has obligated 100 percent of the funds appropriated in fiscal 
year 2022 for Attack Surface Management (ASM). To date, the agency has 
executed a portion of the obligated appropriations (20 percent) to 
initiate a technology assessment to identify candidate tools to advance 
CISA's ASM capabilities, specifically in the areas of asset discovery, 
vulnerability enumeration, domain and subdomain discovery, passive 
scanning, and web app scanning. In addition to the technology 
assessment, funding has been executed to bolster CISA's analytic 
capabilities through enhanced data feeds data analytics, a necessary 
prerequisite to expansion of our ASM capabilities.
    CISA's evaluation has consisted of in-house market research and 
proof-of-value assessments, coordination with other Federal agencies 
(including the U.S. Department of Defense (DoD)) who have stood up 
similar ASM capabilities, and an independent assessment conducted by 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, which concluded in September.
    CISA intends to execute the remainder of the obligated-but-not-yet-
expended fiscal year 2022 appropriations to implement state-of-the-art 
commercial technologies over the duration of this fiscal year to ensure 
that the agency is providing maximum benefit to our stakeholders, and 
will continue to coordinate with DoD and other Federal agencies 
throughout the duration of funding execution and associated capability 
implementation.
    Question 3. How should the adoption of modern ``zero trust'' 
architectures and the latest cybersecurity standards be encouraged as 
ICS and operational technology (OT) systems become more internet-
connected?
    Answer. Due to the unique design limitation inherent in many ICS 
and OT assets, full implementation of Zero Trust across ICS and OT 
environments is especially difficult. Wide-spread utilization is likely 
not feasible until there is a critical mass of available products and 
infrastructure that supports such efforts. While wide-spread adoption 
may be difficult, more mature organizations can likely begin applying 
Zero Trust concepts to some elements of their infrastructure where 
possible. CISA continues to leverage our monthly Control Systems 
Interagency Working Group (CSWG), public-private Control Systems 
Cybersecurity Working Group (CSCSWG), and our Joint Cyber Defense 
Collaborative-ICS group to share lessons learned and best practices to 
accelerate adoption of Zero Trust controls across ICS and OT 
environments.
    Question 4. CISA helps Federal agencies implement the Cybersecurity 
Executive Order and Federal Zero Trust Strategy to move to more modern, 
defensible cyber architectures.
    How is CISA working to encourage adoption of ``zero trust'' 
approaches to cybersecurity by critical infrastructure owners?
    Answer. CISA has developed guidance and is planning to establish a 
Zero Trust program office to lead and support the adoption of Zero 
Trust in the Federal Civilian Executive Branch. The guidance 
publications are Cloud Security Technical Reference Architecture 
(CSTRA) and the Zero Trust Maturity Model (ZTMM), and are intended to 
address modernization, cloud migration, and zero trust strategies and 
approaches that can be broadly applied to support Executive Order 14028 
and associated strategies and policies.
    The CISA Zero Trust Program Office was identified in the National 
Security and Telecommunications Advisory Committee's Report To The 
President, Zero Trust and Trusted Identity Management, February 23, 
2022. The report provided recommendations that CISA should take to 
incorporate Zero Trust practices into Federal cybersecurity programs 
and services. To date, the CISA Cybersecurity Division has initiated 
planning efforts to support the establishment of the program office 
with key lines of effort intended to address critical. This work will 
will be necessary to evolve and mature Zero Trust implementations 
within Federal agencies.
    The CSTRA was co-authored by CISA, Federal Risk and Authorization 
Management Program, and United States Digital Services and addresses 
Zero Trust architecture and protections concepts and approaches 
intended to guide agencies that modernize and migrate applications, 
data, and services to the cloud. This guidance focuses on cloud hosting 
environments to ensure that cybersecurity and data protections, as well 
as monitoring and visibility, are consistent with organizational risk 
management practices. The ZTMM was developed to support and guide 
agencies as they develop strategies and implementation plans to 
transition from perimeter-focused architectures to Zero Trust. The 
maturity model utilizes five pillars and cross-cutting functions to 
explain key capabilities to advance and evolve zero trust within on-
premise and cloud hosting environments.
    Question 5. In July, TSA issued a revised cybersecurity directive 
for pipelines owners to apply ``zero trust'' cybersecurity elements to 
any information technology (IT) or OT system connected to a critical 
pipeline or facility. Federal agencies are also implementing zero trust 
architectures following requirements from the Cybersecurity Executive 
Order.
    Should similar zero trust requirements for IT and OT systems be 
encouraged across all critical infrastructure sectors?
    Answer. The disruptive ransomware attack on Colonial Pipeline in 
May 2021 revealed a continuing significant National security risk with 
critical vulnerabilities in the pipeline sector that previous voluntary 
efforts did not sufficiently mitigate. Following the incident, the 
Transportation Security Administration (TSA) issued two Security 
Directives mandating that pipeline owners and operators implement 
several critically-important and urgently-needed cybersecurity 
measures. TSA developed these directives in close consultation with 
Federal partners, including CISA, the Pipeline Hazardous Materials and 
Safety Administration, and DOE. TSA is working closely with the 
pipeline industry to ensure the successful implementation of the 
measures required by the directives.
    While Zero Trust does represent an effective approach to security, 
and is certainly a strong and growing trend, there are unique 
considerations to its utilization in OT environments. The most 
pertinent of these considerations is that many OT assets were 
originally designed with a focus on safety and reliability with limited 
focus on security. Therefore, many OT environments likely do not 
support effective utilization of Zero Trust, at this time. Before 
adoption can be widely encouraged, the most effective immediate action 
would likely entail working with OT vendors to recognize Zero Trust as 
a desired attribute in future product sets. Additionally, Zero Trust is 
likely too complex of an implementation for many small and medium-sized 
entities for the time being; it may however, be a more realistic goal 
state for more mature and better-resourced organizations.
       Questions From Honorable James Langevin for Vergle Gipson
    Question 1. What are some of the major impediments facing critical 
infrastructure owners and operators and their Federal partners in 
cataloguing Operational Technology (OT) assets and instances of 
Information Technology (IT)/OT convergence, and what can Congress do to 
help overcome those impediments?
    Answer. The convergence of IT/OT is not understood well enough 
within critical infrastructure owners and operators. From Idaho 
National Laboratory's (INL's) perspective, we have seen cases where 
owners and operators were not aware of IT/OT convergence in their 
systems. More educational training and improved information sharing 
between public and private-sector partners are needed. INL recommends 
Congress support these measures in the National Plan and Presidential 
Policy Director-21 rewrites.
    Further, many OT assets do not support the typical tools--like 
asset identification--commonly used by the IT sector. In fact, many IT 
tools may negatively impact OT operation because of their interrogation 
techniques. The commercial and research communities are working to 
address this problem and further investigation and testing against 
representative models of common process environments will be needed to 
achieve higher rates of success of these solutions. We recommend that 
Congress continue to support development and expansion of Digital Bill 
of Material (DBOM), to include Software Bill of Material (SBOM) and 
Hardware Bill of Material (HBOM), as the most promising method to 
document OT assets.
    Question 2. Critical infrastructure cybersecurity, especially as it 
pertains to the security of industrial control systems (ICS), requires 
a workforce with specific skills that are not always identical to those 
needed for traditional IT cybersecurity. To be sure, traditional IT 
cybersecurity skills are valuable for a critical infrastructure 
cybersecurity operator to have. But equally importantly, I think those 
operators must have an understanding of the engineering principles 
underlying specific ICS devices and the systems they control, as well 
as the knowledge of how to maintain physical and environmental safety 
in the operation of such devices.
    Have you seen challenges in critical infrastructure owners and 
operators' ability to attract ICS cybersecurity talent with expertise 
in each of these areas, and are there opportunities for the Federal 
Government, and Congress specifically, to support the development of 
these skills across the ICS cybersecurity workforce?
    Answer. There is a Nation-wide shortage of workers with IT 
cybersecurity skills, and an even larger shortage of workers with OT 
cybersecurity skills. Asset owners and operators, as well as vendors 
and others, have had significant challenges in attracting right-skilled 
workers. In addition to OT cybersecurity courses offered in the private 
sector, Idaho National Laboratory (INL) continues to develop and offer 
advanced and tailored OT cybersecurity training. Furthermore, 
specialized programs, such as the Department of Energy's ``Operational 
Technology Defenders Fellowship,'' have brought together the right 
industry and Government stakeholders to develop the knowledge and the 
relationships to better defend U.S. critical infrastructure. We 
recommend Congress support expansion of the OT Defender Fellowship to 
sectors beyond the energy sector and to additional stakeholders.
    Further, there is a shortage of OT cybersecurity workers who have 
working knowledge of the systems and processes their operational 
technology is controlling. Perhaps even more detrimental to security, 
there is a shortage of engineers and operators who have a working 
knowledge of cybersecurity. We recommend Congress expand its support of 
Cyber-Informed Engineering (CIE) and Consequence-Driven CIE to sectors 
beyond the energy and defense sectors and to additional stakeholders.
  Questions From Ranking Member Andrew R. Garbarino for Vergle Gipson
    Question 1. Critical National infrastructure is susceptible to a 
variety of cybersecurity threats, reliability concerns, aging 
equipment, and resource limitations. To add to the complexity, grid 
modernization efforts are well under way with the advent of smart 
devices, renewable technologies, and cellular connectivity.
    How does INL and Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency 
(CISA) plan to mitigate a growing threat landscape beyond simply 
network monitoring and detection?
    Answer. Investments continue to be made by Idaho National 
Laboratory and CISA in developing advanced cybersecurity tools and 
analysis capabilities that are far beyond ``simply network monitoring 
and detection.''
    We recommend Congress support a ``defense in depth'' and ``security 
by design'' approach for U.S. critical infrastructure. Additional 
funding is needed to expand Cyber-Informed Engineering (CIE) and 
additional test environments are needed at both small-scale and full-
scale to develop and demonstrate effective mitigations. Further 
investments and a build-out of more full-scale and small-scale test 
ranges will allow high-fidelity research to better understand this 
growing landscape, as well as provide the needed research environment 
to develop capabilities and collaborate with asset owners, vendors, and 
Government to solve this evolving problem.
    Question 2. The National Laboratories invest in cutting-edge, 
innovative technologies aimed at tackling some of the hardest 
cybersecurity challenges. However, the transition of emerging, 
desperately-needed technology lacks the funding, sponsorship, and 
ultimately the deployment to secure the grid.
    What strategies and approaches do you recommend at INL to 
transition technology to the utility sector, like the Constrained 
Communications Cyber Device?
    Answer. Federal agencies must commit to the long-term deployment of 
the technology and support collaborative projects to pilot and mature 
them through operational testing with interested private-sector 
commercialization partners so that technology comes to market. The key 
barrier facing deployment of laboratory-developed technologies to the 
utility sector is the ``valley of death.'' This phenomenon happens when 
funding for initial technology development concludes after a proof-of-
concept effort with a technology not yet mature enough for use in 
critical infrastructure environments. It is often difficult for 
laboratory researchers to attract funding to mature technology through 
the maturity cycle, and often the National Laboratories are not the 
most cost-effective entities to perform that work. However, INL and 
other National Laboratories are exploring solutions to obtain funding 
and support to mature these technologies for deployment.
    For example, INL, along with Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, 
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, and Sandia National Laboratories, 
executed a trial program partnered with the Department of Energy's 
Office of Technology Transitions (DOE-OTT) and a venture advisory 
company. In this program, National Laboratories work with the venture 
advisory company to select technologies within their portfolios that 
are highly aligned with the growing needs of highly-regulated 
industries. The venture advisory company establishes an investor 
network to create start-up companies that can develop the technology 
toward the maturity needed for deployment in critical infrastructure. 
The trial of this program was very successful, and DOE-OTT has invested 
in an additional year of execution. Additional funding focused on 
leveraging venture capital to mature technologies past the ``valley of 
death'' into deployable maturity would hasten the deployment of 
technologies like the Constrained Communications Cyber Device.
    We recommend that Congress fund activities to further mature 
appropriate technologies to the operational pilot stage and fund 
activities for the National Laboratories to team with potential 
private-sector partners to demonstrate, operationalize, and deploy 
those technologies.

                                 

