
 - THE PACT ACT AND SECTION 230: THE IMPACT OF THE LAW THAT HELPED CREATE THE INTERNET AND AN EXAMINATION OF PROPOSED REFORMS FOR TODAY'S ONLINE WORLD

[Senate Hearing 116-622]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]






                                                       S. Hrg. 116-622
 
                THE PACT ACT AND SECTION 230: THE IMPACT
                   OF THE LAW THAT HELPED CREATE THE
  INTERNET AND AN EXAMINATION OF PROPOSED REFORMS FOR TODAY'S ONLINE 
                                 WORLD

=======================================================================

                                HEARING

                               before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS, TECHNOLOGY, INNOVATION AND THE INTERNET

                                 of the

                         COMMITTEE ON COMMERCE,
                      SCIENCE, AND TRANSPORTATION
                          UNITED STATES SENATE

                     ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

                             SECOND SESSION

                               __________

                             JULY 28, 2020

                               __________

    Printed for the use of the Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
                             Transportation
                             
                             
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]



                Available online: http://www.govinfo.gov
                
                
                
                                ______
       
                    U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE 
        52-821 PDF          WASHINGTON : 2023
 
       
       
       

                     ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

                             SECOND SESSION

                  ROGER WICKER, Mississippi, Chairman
JOHN THUNE, South Dakota             MARIA CANTWELL, Washington, 
ROY BLUNT, Missouri                      Ranking
TED CRUZ, Texas                      AMY KLOBUCHAR, Minnesota
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska                RICHARD BLUMENTHAL, Connecticut
JERRY MORAN, Kansas                  BRIAN SCHATZ, Hawaii
DAN SULLIVAN, Alaska                 EDWARD MARKEY, Massachusetts
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               TOM UDALL, New Mexico
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          GARY PETERS, Michigan
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
MIKE LEE, Utah                       TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
RON JOHNSON, Wisconsin               JON TESTER, Montana
TODD YOUNG, Indiana                  KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
RICK SCOTT, Florida                  JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
                       John Keast, Staff Director
                  Crystal Tully, Deputy Staff Director
                      Steven Wall, General Counsel
                 Kim Lipsky, Democratic Staff Director
              Chris Day, Democratic Deputy Staff Director
                      Renae Black, Senior Counsel
                                 ------                                

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS, TECHNOLOGY, INNOVATION AND THE INTERNET

JOHN THUNE, South Dakota, Chairman
ROY BLUNT, Missouri                  BRIAN SCHATZ, Hawaii, Ranking
TED CRUZ, Texas                      AMY KLOBUCHAR, Minnesota
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska                RICHARD BLUMENTHAL, Connecticut
JERRY MORAN, Kansas                  EDWARD MARKEY, Massachusetts
DAN SULLIVAN, Alaska                 TOM UDALL, New Mexico
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               GARY PETERS, Michigan
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
MIKE LEE, Utah                       JON TESTER, Montana
RON JOHNSON, Wisconsin               KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
TODD YOUNG, Indiana                  JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
RICK SCOTT, Florida
                            C O N T E N T S

                              ----------                              
                                                                   Page
Hearing held on July 28, 2020....................................     1
Statement of Senator Thune.......................................     1
Statement of Senator Schatz......................................     4
Statement of Senator Wicker......................................     5
Statement of Senator Klobuchar...................................    59
Statement of Senator Fischer.....................................    61
Statement of Senator Blumenthal..................................    63
    Prepared statement from Nicole, Mother of a Child Whose 
      Sexually Abused Images Were Circulated Online..............    64
    Letter dated July 27, 2020 to Hon. John Thune and Hon. Brian 
      Schatz from Computer & Communications Industry Association, 
      Consumer Technology Association, Engine, and Internet 
      Infrastructure Coalition...................................    91
Statement of Senator Moran.......................................    67
Statement of Senator Udall.......................................    69
Statement of Senator Gardner.....................................    71
Statement of Senator Peters......................................    74
Statement of Senator Cruz........................................    76
Statement of Senator Lee.........................................    78
Statement of Senator Baldwin.....................................    80
Statement of Senator Blackburn...................................    82
Statement of Senator Tester......................................    83
Statement of Senator Rosen.......................................    85

                               Witnesses

Hon. Christopher Cox, Counsel, Morgan, Lewis & Bockius, LLP; 
  Director, NetChoice............................................     7
    Prepared statement...........................................     9
Jeff Kosseff, Assistant Professor, Cyber Science Department, 
  United States Naval Academy....................................    29
    Prepared statement...........................................    30
Elizabeth Banker, Deputy General Counsel, Internet Association...    39
    Prepared statement...........................................    40
Olivier Sylvain, Professor, Fordham Law School...................    49
    Prepared statement...........................................    51

                                Appendix

Response to written question submitted to Jeff Kosseff by:
    Hon. Shelley Moore Capito....................................    95
    Hon. Rick Scott..............................................    95


                     THE PACT ACT AND SECTION 230:



                   THE IMPACT OF THE LAW THAT HELPED



                       CREATE THE INTERNET AND AN



        EXAMINATION OF PROPOSED REFORMS FOR TODAY'S ONLINE WORLD

                              ----------                              


                         TUESDAY, JULY 28, 2020

                               U.S. Senate,
       Subcommittee on Communications, Technology, 
                       Innovation and the Internet,
        Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation,
                                                    Washington, DC.
    The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m., in 
room SD-106, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. John Thune, 
Chairman of the Subcommittee, presiding.
    Present: Senators Thune [presiding], Cruz, Fischer, Moran, 
Gardner, Blackburn, Lee, Schatz, Klobuchar, Blumenthal, Udall, 
Peters, Baldwin, Tester, and Rosen.
    Also present: Senators Wicker, Ex Officio, and Cantwell, Ex 
Officio.

             OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN THUNE, 
                 U.S. SENATOR FROM SOUTH DAKOTA

    Senator Thune. Good morning. We'll get this hearing 
underway.
    I want to thank everybody for being here today, both 
virtually and in person. Our panelists today are all appearing 
virtually, so we look forward very much to hearing from all of 
you.
    We are here to examine the legacy of Section 230 of the 
Communications Decency Act, which was enacted into law 24 years 
ago, and to discuss a proposal Senator Schatz and I have 
introduced to reform Section 230 known as the Platform 
Accountability and Consumer Transparency Act, or the PACT Act.
    Section 230 was written to protect Internet platforms--both 
large and small--from being held liable for user-generated 
content while also enabling these platforms to take an active 
role in moderating such content.
    The sweeping nature of these protections, coupled with 
expansive readings by the courts, has come to mean that, with 
few exceptions, Internet platforms are not liable for the 
comments, pictures, and videos that their users and subscribers 
post, no matter how harmful.
    As one of our witnesses here today has written in what he 
calls his biography of Section 230, the law's proposal and 
passage flew under the radar back in 1996, receiving virtually 
no opposition or media coverage. Today, however, Section 230 is 
the subject of intense debate and media scrutiny, to the extent 
that both the President of the United States and his likely 
competitor in this fall's election have called for the complete 
repeal of Section 230.
    One of many variables that has sparked the intense debate 
about Section 230 is that Internet platforms have actively 
cultivated the notion that they are merely providing the 
technology for people to communicate and share their thoughts 
and ideas. Therefore, until only relatively recently, the 
platforms largely concealed, or at the very least failed to 
disclose, their moderation and curation systems to sustain this 
fiction of being a neutral platform for all ideas.
    Content moderation has, and largely continues to be, a 
black box, which has led to deep suspicion by many users about 
bias and discrimination. The reality is that platforms have a 
strong incentive to exercise control over the content each of 
us sees, because if they can present us with content that will 
keep us engaged on the platform, we will stay on the platform 
longer. Moderation is an important function that platforms must 
provide in order to deliver a valuable experience to their 
users. Unfortunately, it's hard for users to get good 
information about how content is moderated.
    The Internet has evolved significantly since Section 230 
was enacted. Long gone are the days of the online bulletin 
boards. Today, Internet platforms have sophisticated content 
moderation tools, algorithms, and recommended engines to 
promote content and connect users, all optimized toward keeping 
every user engaged on the platform.
    The platforms have monetized these systems through targeted 
advertising and related businesses, and have consequently 
become some of the largest companies in the world. Moreover, 
these platforms have become essential to our daily lives, as 
many Americans live, work, and communicate increasingly online. 
That is why it is important to recognize that the benefits of 
Section 230 for companies have come with tradeoffs for 
consumers.
    As the Department of Justice has noted in its 
recommendations to reform Section 230, broad Section 230 
immunity can pose challenges for Federal agencies in civil 
enforcement matters. It is questionable whether Section 230 was 
intended to allow companies to invoke immunity against the 
Federal Government acting to protect American consumers in the 
civil enforcement context. This has contributed to the creation 
of a different set of rules for enforcing consumer protections 
against online companies compared to those in the offline 
world.
    In addition, disparate complaint intake and transparency 
reporting practices between Internet companies have led to a 
limited ability for consumers to address and correct harms that 
occur online. And, as Americans conduct more and more of their 
activities online, the net outcome is an increasingly less 
protected and more vulnerable consumer.
    The Internet of 1996 is a far cry from the Internet of 
2020. And, as Americans exist increasingly online, a trend now 
being accelerated by the COVID-19 pandemic, as illustrated by 
the fact that each of our witnesses is attending virtually 
today, reevaluating Section 230 within today's context will 
ensure its protections continue to balance the interests of 
both consumers and companies.
    Against this backdrop, the bill Senator Schatz and I have 
introduced would update Section 230 to enable greater 
transparency and accountability for users without damaging its 
foundational economic, innovative, and entrepreneurial benefit 
that helped allow the Internet to flourish in the first place.
    The PACT Act would require companies that moderate content 
to provide a clear and easily accessible user policy that 
explains how, when, and why user-generated content might be 
removed. It would also require these online platforms to create 
a defined complaint system that processes reports and notifies 
users of moderation decisions within 14 days.
    Our legislation would require large technology companies to 
have a toll-free customer-service phone line with live customer 
support to take customer complaints. This requirement is geared 
toward consumers who are less familiar with technology and 
those in marginalized communities who may not have readily 
available access to technology, but who want or need to talk to 
a real person about a complaint about content on a service or 
platform.
    The PACT Act would also hold platforms accountable for 
their content moderation practices by requiring them to submit 
quarterly reports to the Federal Trade Commission outlining 
material they've removed from their sites or chosen to de-
emphasize.
    In addition, the PACT Act would make it clear that the 
immunity provided by Section 230 does not apply to civil 
enforcement actions by the Federal Government. The PACT Act 
would also make clear that Section 230 does not apply where a 
platform is provided with a court order finding that content is 
unlawful.
    Both of these provisions are also recommendations that the 
Department of Justice recently put forward in its recent review 
of Section 230. At its core, Section 230 reform is about 
balancing the consumers' need for transparency and 
accountability against Internet companies' need for flexibility 
and autonomy. I believe the PACT Act strikes the right balance, 
and I'm committed to achieving a meaningful bipartisan approach 
to Section 230 reform that can be enacted into law sooner 
rather than later.
    However, I recognize that the Internet is complex and any 
meaningful regulation must consider various perspectives from 
diverse groups in academia, civil society, and industry. 
Consequently, we have brought together today a very 
distinguished panel, and I'm confident the conversation will 
help ensure that we are reforming Section 230 in the right way. 
Each of our witnesses has deep expertise in both the original 
intent of Section 230 and how it has been interpreted by the 
courts over the years.
    Today we're joined by former Representative Chris Cox, the 
coauthor of Section 230 of the Communications Decency Act; Jeff 
Kosseff, Assistant Professor of Cyber Science at the United 
States Naval Academy; Elizabeth Banker, Deputy General Counsel 
of the Internet Association; and Olivier Sylvain, Professor of 
Law at Fordham School of Law. Thanks to each of you for 
participating on this important topic.
    And I'm now going to recognize Senator Schatz, who will be 
joining us remotely for his opening statement.
    Senator Schatz.

                STATEMENT OF HON. BRIAN SCHATZ, 
                    U.S. SENATOR FROM HAWAII

    Senator Schatz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this 
hearing today to discuss Section 230 of the Platform 
Accountability and Consumer Transparency Act, the PACT Act.
    Before we go any further, I just want to offer some thanks 
to the Chairman of the Subcommittee, Chairman Thune. Our 
process has been serious, it has been bipartisan. It is the way 
the Senate should work. It is the way the Commerce Committee 
should work. And I'm proud to partner with him on this 
legislation.
    Unfortunately, a lot of the discussion around Section 230 
has been focused on provocative but sometimes reactionary and, 
in some cases, unconstitutional ideas based on the perceived 
political slights of the day. And there may be some who try to 
use this hearing as an opportunity to create a clip for social 
media or to make a few partisan headlines. But, that's not what 
this hearing is for. We are here to legislate. The work we are 
doing here today is a serious effort to review Section 230 
objectively and on a bipartisan basis, to evaluate how this law 
should be amended to benefit the American people. This work is 
already difficult, and it is made much more difficult by 
grandstanding.
    Section 230 was, by all accounts, a prescient and novel 
idea back in 1996, when it became law. It prevented online 
platforms from being treated as the publisher or speaker of 
third-party content, and that avoided liability for their 
users' content, and, in so doing this, allowed innovators in 
the United States to create and build products using third-
party content without the threat of litigation. This unique 
idea is one reason why the largest tech companies began in the 
United States. And, because they started here, many of these 
platforms became a vehicle for the spread of free speech and 
democratic ideals across the planet. But, today's Internet is 
different from when Section 230 is adopted.
    And this brings me to a fundamental point. It is OK to 
update a law. It doesn't mean you think the law was badly 
written or is deeply, deeply flawed. It just means that, as the 
Telecommunications Act is periodically amended, as the National 
Defense Authorization Act is periodically amended, that this 
law needs to be updated so that it continues to work well.
    Now that the Internet has evolved, it is important to ask 
how Section 230 should evolve along with it. Last month, I 
introduced the PACT Act with Senator Thune. The bill amends 
Section 230 and imposes new responsibilities, but not 
unreasonable ones, on online platforms. It focuses on three 
concepts: accountability, transparency, and protections for 
consumers online. To make platforms more accountable to their 
consumers, the bill requires platforms to respond to consumer 
complaints about content that is against their own acceptable-
use policies or that a court has already determined to be 
illegal; to improve transparency by requiring platforms to 
publish reports so that people know what a platform is doing to 
moderate, based on its own rules; and it increases online 
consumer protections by fixing the current legal disparities 
between online and offline commerce and communications.
    Some view the debate about Section 230 reform as an 
opportunity to work the refs or claim bias or make people 
fearful of the enforcement of content moderation policies. Our 
approach has been different. This bill is not targeted at a 
specific type of content, business model, or company, and its 
purpose is not to censor or control, or even influence, free 
speech. Diverse viewpoints make us stronger as a Nation, it's 
better for the Internet, and I believe that we should preserve 
robust protections that enable discourse in our country online 
and offline.
    But, I'm proud to be working on such a measured approach to 
Section 230 reform, and I appreciate the partnership with 
Senator Thune and his excellent staff. This has been truly a 
bipartisan effort, and I thank him for the hard work.
    Section 230 proponents say that Congress can't possibly 
change this law without disrupting all of the great innovation 
that it has enabled. And I just disagree with that. The 
legislative process is about making sure that our laws are in 
the public interest, and the PACT Act offers some commonsense 
changes to the way that the statute functions so consumers have 
protections, so platforms have accountability and transparency, 
and so that the statute works today for the Internet.
    I want to thank the witnesses for joining us and sharing 
their expertise on this issue. As part of its jurisdictional 
oversight on these issues, the Subcommittee looks forward to 
hearing from you about how the PACT Act's provisions might be a 
realistic step toward modernizing Section 230. And I look 
forward to hearing their testimony.
    Senator Thune. Thank you, Senator Schatz. And it has been 
great partnering with you and your team, and producing 
something that I think really does represent a good, balanced, 
sound approach to an issue that has vexed those from all 
persuasions and perspectives for some time, and I hope that we 
can make some progress and move this legislation forward.
    We are joined today by the distinguished Chairman of the 
Full Committee, Senator Wicker, and I'm going to recognize him 
to make some opening remarks.
    Senator Wicker.

                STATEMENT OF HON. ROGER WICKER, 
                 U.S. SENATOR FROM MISSISSIPPI

    The Chairman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And I do 
want to congratulate you and Senator Schatz for working 
together to solve this matter in a bipartisan fashion.
    This is a very important hearing to examine Section 230 of 
the Communications Decency Act. And I want to extend our thanks 
and appreciation and welcome to the witnesses for appearing 
with us remotely.
    Section 230 of the Communications Decency Act was enacted 
in 1996 as part of broader reforms to the Communications Act. 
Section 230 protects interactive computer services, such as 
social media platforms, from being held liable for the content 
posted by their users. Section 230 also specifically allows an 
interactive computer service, acting in good faith, to restrict 
the availability of content that it considers to be obscene, 
lewd, lascivious, filthy, excessively violent, harassing, or 
otherwise objectionable. And I emphasize ``otherwise 
objectionable.'' The intent of the law, as codified in the 
statute, is to preserve a vibrant and competitive online 
marketplace for the benefit of all Americans. Indeed, a portion 
of the title chosen by the Subcommittee Chair for this hearing 
is ``The Impact of the Law that Helped Create the Internet.'' 
True words.
    At the time of its enactment, the Internet was in its 
infancy. No one could have imagined the success of the digital 
economy we enjoy today. Section 230 has underpinned much of the 
Internet's growth and development. It has enabled social media 
platforms, app developers, websites, bloggers, and others, to 
host a variety of content and support the free flow of 
information and ideas without being held legally responsible 
for the materials generated by users. It has also empowered 
interactive computer services to remove content that may 
diminish the safety and security of the Internet.
    Despite the vast economic and social benefits of the law, 
however, I have been deeply troubled by recent reports that 
suggest some online platforms are disproportionately censoring 
conservative voices or posing an unfair bias through their 
policies and terms of service. The administration's executive 
order on preventing online censorship calls attention to these 
issues.
    As the Committee with jurisdiction over Section 230 of the 
Communications Decency Act, it is our responsibility to ensure 
that the law is applied consistently, fairly, and objectively. 
To ensure greater accountability to the law, this may 
necessitate a review of these statutes' legal shield for social 
media companies and others to remove content that they, in 
their sole discretion, deem to be, quote, ``otherwise 
objectionable.'' In particular, I question whether this term is 
too broad and improperly shields online platforms from 
liability when they remove content that they simply disagree 
with, dislike, or find distasteful. Such a term may require 
further defining to reduce ambiguity, increase accountability, 
and prevent misapplication of the law.
    This morning, I hope witnesses will discuss the types of 
content that fall under the category of ``otherwise 
objectionable.'' I hope witnesses will also discuss the process 
by which interactive computer services objectively determine 
what constitutes ``otherwise objectionable content,'' and how 
that process is communicated to users in order to preserve a 
true diversity of political discourse online, as intended by 
the law. This will help inform the Committee's efforts to 
maintain a free and open Internet that promotes competition and 
innovation, and protects multiple viewpoints.
    Again, I thank Chairman Thune and Ranking Member Schatz for 
convening this important hearing.
    Thank you.
    Senator Thune. Thank you, Chairman Wicker.
    We will now turn to our panel. And, as I mentioned, we have 
with us a former House member, Chris Cox, a former colleague of 
both Senator Wicker and I, and delighted to have him back here. 
We look forward to hearing from you, Chris. He is now speaking 
here on behalf of NetChoice. As I said, Mr. Jeff Kosseff, Ms. 
Elizabeth Banker, and Mr. Olivier Sylvain. And my apologies for 
getting your name wrong the first time.
    We'll start with Chris Cox.
    Chris, welcome. And it's great to have you here. We look 
forward to hearing from you. Please proceed.
    And I would say, to all of our panelists, to the degree--I 
know it's hard for you there, probably; you don't have a 
clock--but, if you could contain or confine your oral remarks 
to about 5 minutes, it'll maximize the amount of time we have 
to ask questions and get your responses. And all your comments 
will be made a part of the permanent hearing record.
    So, Mr. Cox, you are recognized.

  STATEMENT OF HON. CHRISTOPHER COX, COUNSEL, MORGAN, LEWIS & 
               BOCKIUS, LLP; DIRECTOR, NETCHOICE

    Mr. Cox. Well, thank you very much, Chairman Thune and 
Ranking Member Schatz and members of the Subcommittee. Thank 
you for your invitation to join you in exploring these issues 
this morning.
    I want to apologize for this voice. Since you last heard 
from me, I've had some surgery that, as an unfortunate side 
effect, left me with one of my two vocal cords paralyzed. But, 
I promise to give you, this morning, my full 50 percent.
    I should also state at the outset that the views I express 
this morning are my own and not necessarily those of Morgan, 
Lewis & Bockius or of NetChoice, where I am a Director.
    Those of you who were here in 1995 and 1996 will remember 
the debate over pornography on the Internet that gave birth to 
the CDA and, indirectly, Section 230, a quarter century ago. At 
the time, wayward court decisions really threatened the future 
of the Internet. A web portal that had done the good deed of 
screening some user-generated content was being held 
responsible, therefore, for screening all of it. And, under 
that unfortunate rule, the good deed of at least trying to keep 
the Internet free from objectionable material would have been 
punished.
    So, the bill that I wrote to eliminate this perverse 
incentive, cosponsored by our then House colleague, Ron Wyden, 
is what eventually became what we now know as Section 230. 
Looking across the intervening decades of judicial 
interpretation of Section 230, we can see that the law has 
contributed directly to the success of the Internet by 
providing a legal foundation for user-generated content today 
shared not just among millions, but billions, of people.
    We think about the remarkable accomplishment of Wikipedia, 
something that many of us use almost daily and take for 
granted, it's long since outstripped the information that was 
contained in the once unparalleled Encyclopedia Britannica. 
It's just one marvel of the 21st century that we take for 
granted. Wikipedia relies entirely upon user-generated content. 
It's operated by the Wikimedia Foundation, which is, itself, a 
small organization funded by voluntary contributions. If it 
were subject to lawsuits for the contributions and comments of 
its volunteers and users, it couldn't sustain itself, and it 
would cease to exist as an invaluable free resource for every 
American.
    The fundamental objective of Section 230 has always been to 
protect the innocent and punish the guilty. The law achieves 
this objective by protecting websites that host user-created 
content when, in good faith, they become involved in content 
creation for the purpose of keeping objectionable material off 
of their sites, or editing content created by others, or taking 
it down altogether in order to remove offensive material. To 
this extent, the law says they will not be treated as 
publishers.
    At the same time, Section 230, as written and as 
interpreted today, makes clear that becoming involved in 
content creation for any other purpose eliminates any 
protection from suit. And that's true even if the involvement 
in content creation is only partial. And it's true even if the 
Internet platform doesn't, itself, create the content, but only 
develops it. And when the platform is only partly responsible 
for the mere development, not necessarily the creation, it 
still loses its Section 230 protection. If a website is in any 
way complicit in the creation or development of illegal 
content, it has no Section 230 immunity. The inclusion of this 
clear language in the statute was absolutely deliberate. It was 
intended to ensure that both criminal and civil laws would 
continue to be vigorously enforced. And that's why Section 230 
expressly states that Federal criminal law is entirely 
unaffected by its provisions, and neither is there any effect 
on the enforcement of State law, whether civil or criminal, 
provided that the State laws are enforced consistently with the 
uniform national policy expressed in Section 230.
    That uniform national policy applies equally to all civil 
and criminal offenses. It's important that there be a uniform 
national policy, because the Internet is the quintessential 
vehicle of interstate commerce, and its packet-switched 
architecture makes it uniquely susceptible to multiple sources 
of conflicting State and local regulation. Even an e-mail from 
this hearing room to someone in the Capitol across the street 
can be broken up into pieces and routed through servers in 
different states. If every state were free to adopt its own 
policy governing when an Internet platform will be liable, not 
only would compliance become oppressive, but the Federal policy 
itself would quickly become undone.
    Section 230 changed none of the legal responsibilities of 
any individual or business or nonprofit. The same legal rules 
continue to apply on the Internet, just as in the offline 
world. What Section 230 added to the general body of law was 
the principle that an individual or entity operating a website 
could not, in addition to its own legal responsibilities, be 
required to monitor all of the content created by third parties 
in order to avoid becoming derivatively liable for the illegal 
acts of other people.
    Congress recognized that to require otherwise would deprive 
all of us of the essential benefit of the Internet: the 
opportunity for realtime communication among millions of people 
around the world. Section 230 succeeded in safeguarding this 
quintessential aspect of the Internet. Today, there are over 
370 million active websites hosted in America, and over 875 
million websites accessible to American users.
    But, despite the tremendous variety this represents, most 
of the legislation now being drafted in the House and in the 
Senate to regulate these websites seems focused on a very 
different paradigm and a much smaller group of companies. The 
paradigm of what needs to be regulated seems to be an enormous 
rapacious company interested only in manipulating its customers 
or strangling democracy in America. That doesn't come close to 
describing even the largest e-commerce sites, which are mostly 
the traditional brick-and-mortar companies, including Kohl's, 
Target, Costco, and Walmart, and the Big Tech paradigm 
certainly doesn't describe the hundreds of thousands of other 
websites, of all sizes, that bring us user-created content 
every day. Yet all of these websites, and, more importantly, 
all of us who are their users, rely on the protection of 
Section 230 to have access to the many services they provide.
    So, as you consider whether--and, if so, how--to legislate 
in this area, it's important to remember just how much human 
activity is encompassed within this vast category we so 
casually refer to as ``the Internet.'' To the extent that any 
new legislation imposes too much compliance burden or too much 
liability exposure that's connected to a website's hosting of 
user-created content, the risk is that too many websites will 
be forced to respond by getting rid of user-generated content 
altogether or else scaling it way back. Either way, millions of 
Internet users in the United States would feel the loss 
immediately.
    I feel confident in saying that if writing Section 230 a 
quarter century ago was a daunting undertaking, amending it 
today presents a far greater challenge. Any changes you make 
will affect every business, every nonprofit, and every 
individual in America in some ways that you can't even predict 
and that will inevitably disappoint you.
    For that reason, I commend all of you on this committee for 
taking the thoughtful approach that you are and making every 
effort to inform yourselves about the endless real-world 
consequences before legislating in this area.
    I look forward to your questions.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Cox follows:]

Prepared Statement of Chris Cox, Former U.S. Representative, Author and 
             Co-Sponsor with Senator Ron Wyden, Section 230
    Chairman Thune, Ranking Member Schatz, and Members of the 
Subcommittee, thank you for the invitation to testify on the history of 
Section 230 and its application by the courts over the last quarter 
century. This experiential base is an important starting point as you 
consider ways to ensure that platforms are accountable for their 
content moderation practices, and what legislative measures, from 
transparency to accountability tools, can empower consumers online.
    My abiding interest in this subject dates, of course, to some 
twenty-four years ago when I joined then-Rep. Ron Wyden in writing what 
today is known as Section 230. In the intervening quarter century I 
have followed the developments in the case law, sometimes with awe and 
occasionally with disappointment. The views I express today are my own, 
and not necessarily those of NetChoice, on whose board I serve, or of 
Morgan, Lewis & Bockius.
Introduction
    As we consider the issues surrounding free expression and content 
moderation on the internet, it is worth asking: what would our world be 
like without Section 230?
    This is an important question because, to a degree most of us fail 
to recognize, we take its many benefits for granted. An endless variety 
of useful and important content on the Internet is supplied not by 
websites or social media platforms, but by their millions of users who 
create the content themselves and freely share it. Without Section 230, 
millions of American websites--facing unlimited legal liability for 
what their users create--would not be able to host user-generated 
content at all.
    In this way, moreover, Section 230 facilitates every individual's 
ability to publish their own content on the internet. The wide variety 
of online forums for posting user-created content is the direct result 
of the protection from liability for the host sites that Section 230 
affords.
    At the same time that Section 230 has enabled an endless diversity 
of voices to reach far greater audiences than was ever possible before, 
this same law has helped websites to maintain civility and fair play 
through the application of bespoke standards of content moderation. In 
contrast to other nations, in the United States the government does not 
dictate what can be published on the Internet and who can publish it. 
The proliferation of websites, each free to adopt their own rules of 
the road, has simultaneously provided unparalleled opportunities for 
any individual to reach millions of people around the world--and the 
means by which offensive online conduct including bullying and 
obscenity, as well as outright criminal activity, can be restricted 
without fear of legal liability.
    Before the enactment of Section 230, Internet platforms faced a 
terrible dilemma. If they sought to enforce even minimal rules of the 
road in order to maintain civility and keep their sites free from 
obscenity and obnoxious behavior, they became unlimitedly liable for 
all of the user-created content on their site.\1\ On the other hand, if 
the website followed an ``anything goes'' business model, with no 
content moderation whatsoever, then it could completely avoid that 
liability.\2\ From the perspective of any Internet platform that 
attempted to maintain a family-friendly site, it was a classic case of 
``no good deed goes unpunished.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ Stratton Oakmont v. Prodigy Servs. Co., 1995 WL 323710 
(N.Y.Sup.Ct. May 24, 1995).
    \2\ Cubby, Inc. v. CompuServe, Inc., 776 F. Supp. 135, 140 
(S.D.N.Y. 1991).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Section 230 eliminated the perverse incentive for ``anything 
goes.'' By imposing liability on criminals and tortfeasors for their 
own wrongful communications and conduct, rather than shifting that 
liability to a website that did not in any way participate in the 
wrongdoing, it freed each website to clean up its corner of the 
internet. No longer would being a ``Good Samaritan'' buy trouble.
    In an imagined future world without Section 230, where websites and 
Internet platforms again face enormous potential liability for hosting 
content created by others, there would again be a powerful incentive to 
limit that exposure. Online platforms could accomplish this in one of 
two ways. They could strictly limit user-generated content, or even 
eliminate it altogether; or they could adopt the ``anything goes'' 
model that was the way to escape liability before Section 230 existed.
    We would all be very much worse off were this to happen. Without 
Section 230's clear limitation on liability it is difficult to imagine 
that most of the online services on which we rely every day would even 
exist in anything like their current form.
    As Congress considers whether to amend Section 230, therefore, it 
is important to keep in mind the many aspects of the modern Internet we 
take for granted, and that are dependent upon Section 230's 
protections. Compromising those protections risks a wide array of 
unintended consequences. Among these are loss of much of the rich 
content provided every day by millions of individual content creators, 
loss of the ability to use social media for real time communication 
with friends and family, loss of opportunities for diverse voices to 
reach broad audiences throughout the Nation and across the planet, and 
damage to e-commerce and the continued technological development of the 
internet.
    In the 21st century, Section 230's protection of website operators 
from liability for content created by their users operates as an 
essential buttress of free expression. It is the key to millions of 
Americans' ability to share news and views and gain instant access to a 
wide range of informational and educational resources. It is the 
foundation supporting e-commerce sites such as Yelp, eBay, Facebook, 
Wikipedia, Amazon, Twitter, and the entire Web 2.0 revolution whereby 
thousands of innovative platforms offer a range of useful services 
powered by user-generated content. From user-created reviews of 
products and services, to educational videos, to online resources that 
help locate loved ones after natural disasters, to the many online 
services that have come to the rescue of millions of Americans 
quarantined or in self-isolation during the Covid pandemic, all of the 
rich variety now available at our fingertips is precisely what Section 
230 was designed to facilitate.
    But while Section 230 has been a boon to users of the Internet and 
to the continued technological and commercial development of the 
Internet itself, it is not a panacea. We are all familiar with the many 
pathologies that continue to fester in corners of the dark web, and 
that too often leach onto the mainstream Internet websites and 
platforms we rely on every day. Continued challenges to a free and open 
Internet include the threat of hidden platform ``censorship'' and 
undisclosed viewpoint discrimination; ``fake news'' and content 
manipulation by bad actors; defamation, cyberstalking, and revenge 
porn; fraud on consumers; internet-facilitated criminal gang activity; 
cross-border terrorism; child sexual abuse and sex trafficking; and 
widespread censorship and social control by dictatorships and 
authoritarian governments including not only Russia and China, but 
scores of other nations besides.
    Section 230 has not prevented these affronts, but neither is it the 
cause of them. In many cases, it has helped mitigate their 
consequences. Preserving the law's benefits for Internet users, 
society, and the Nation's economy should remain an overarching 
objective of any legislation to address the many looming concerns 
across the rapidly-evolving landscape of the internet.
    In that respect, we will be well advised to recognize the danger of 
unintended consequences that would accompany efforts to reopen Section 
230 to further amendment. There are many competing interests at stake, 
both commercially and politically, in the constellation of issues 
affected by Section 230. As each of you is fully aware, the various 
criticisms of Section 230 come from disparate quarters, and are based 
on radically different rationales. For example, while some critics 
demand more robust content moderation, their political opposites demand 
less interference with user-created content. The process of turning a 
bill into law in these circumstances will require potentially trenchant 
compromises.
    The multiplicity of stakeholders, including competing business 
interests, affected by any new legislation governing activity on the 
internet--not to mention the many different committees that will be 
involved in both the House and Senate, and the inevitable need to 
compromise among them in order for a bill to make it through the entire 
process--means that you may not recognize your legislative handiwork in 
the final product. So even though it is possible to imagine that a 
``perfect'' bill might emerge from the Commerce Committee that would 
clarify and improve Section 230 while preserving all of its benefits, 
the legislative process that will inevitably follow is likely to 
adulterate that ``perfection'' and potentially threaten the essential 
elements of Section 230 that make it work. This very real risk to the 
many societal benefits that a majority of Congress still believes flow 
from Section 230 is worth considering before opening what could be a 
Pandora's box.
Background and Legislative History of Section 230
    Section 230 was signed into law 24 years ago, in 1996.\3\ When my 
colleague Ron Wyden (D-OR) and I conceptualized the law in 1995, 
roughly 20 million American adults had access to the internet, compared 
to 7.5 billion today.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \3\ 104 P.L. 104, 110 Stat. 56.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Those who were early to take advantage of the opportunity to ``surf 
the web,'' including many in Congress, quickly confronted this 
essential aspect of online activity: on each website, many users 
converge through one portal. The difference between newspapers and 
magazines, on the one hand, and the World Wide Web (as it was then 
called), on the other hand, was striking. In the print world, a single 
staff of human beings reviewed and cataloged editorial content that was 
then distributed to a large number of passive recipients. The same was 
true of television and radio. On the web, in contrast, millions of 
users themselves created content which became accessible to the entire 
planet immediately. While the volume of users was only in the millions, 
not the billions as today, it was even then evident to almost every 
user of the web that no group of human beings would ever be able to 
keep pace with the growth of content on the internet.
    At the time, however, not all in Congress were users of the web who 
appreciated these fundamentals. The Communications Decency Act 
(``CDA''), introduced in the Senate by James Exon (D-NE), was premised 
on the notion that the FBI could filter the web, screening out 
offensive content. This was a faulty premise based on a fundamental 
misunderstanding of the scale and the functioning of the internet. 
Nonetheless, in large part because the stated target of the CDA was 
pornography, the Senate voted overwhelmingly (the vote was 84-16) in 
favor of it.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \4\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Section 230 was not part of the CDA. Instead, it was a freestanding 
bill introduced in the House as H.R. 1978, the Internet Freedom and 
Family Empowerment Act, in June 1995. It was intended as an alternative 
to the CDA. When it was offered as a standalone floor Cox-Wyden 
amendment during consideration of the Telecommunications Act in August 
1995, it was roundly endorsed on both sides of the aisle during debate. 
At the same time, both Democratic and Republican lawmakers sharply 
criticized the CDA. They then voted nearly unanimously in favor of the 
Cox-Wyden amendment, while excluding the CDA from the House version of 
the Telecommunications Act.
    In the conference on what became the Telecommunications Act of 1996 
that followed, as is so often the case in legislative compromises 
between House and Senate, the conferees on agreed to include both 
diametrically opposed bills in the Conference Report. Subsequently, the 
U.S. Supreme Court gutted the CDA's indecency provisions, which it 
found violated the First Amendment, giving Rep. Wyden and me the 
victory we did not at first achieve in conference.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \5\ Reno v. American Civil Liberties Union, 521 U.S. 844 (1997).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The fundamental flaw of the CDA was its misunderstanding of the 
Internet as a medium. We can now easily see that it would have been 
impossible for the bulletin boards, chat rooms, forums, and e-mail that 
were then budding on the web to be screened in any meaningful way by 
the FBI, or by the operators of individual websites themselves, even at 
the far lower volumes of traffic that existed then. Worse, if the law 
were to demand such screening, the fundamental strength of the new 
medium--facilitating the free exchange of information among millions of 
users--would be lost.
The Prodigy and CompuServe cases
    The impetus for the Internet Freedom and Family Empowerment Act, 
today's Section 230, was a New York Superior Court case that I first 
saw reported in the Wall Street Journal in May 1995.\6\ It involved one 
of the leading Internet portals of the day. The case concerned an 
allegedly defamatory bulletin board post on the Prodigy web service by 
an unknown user. The post claimed that an investment bank and its 
founder, Jordan Belfort, had committed securities fraud. (The post was 
not in fact defamatory: Belfort was later convicted of securities 
fraud, but not before Prodigy had settled the case for a substantial 
figure. Belfort would achieve further infamy when he became the model 
for Leonardo DiCaprio's character in ``The Wolf of Wall Street.'')
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \6\ Milo Geyelin, New York judge rules Prodigy responsible for on-
line content, Wall St. Jo., May 26, 1995.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    By holding Prodigy liable for the allegedly illegal content posted 
by its user, the New York court established a new precedent with far-
reaching consequences.\7\ Up until then, the courts had not permitted 
such claims for third-party liability. In 1991, a Federal district 
court in New York held that CompuServe, another web service similar to 
Prodigy that hosted a variety of user-created content, was not liable 
in circumstances very similar to those in the Prodigy case. The court 
reasoned that CompuServe ``had no opportunity to review the contents of 
the publication at issue before it was uploaded into CompuServe's 
computer banks,'' and therefore was not subject to publisher liability 
for the third party content.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \7\ Stratton Oakmont v. Prodigy Servs. Co., 1995 WL 323710 
(N.Y.Sup.Ct. May 24, 1995)
    \8\ Cubby, Inc. v. CompuServe, Inc., 776 F. Supp. 135, 140 
(S.D.N.Y. 1991) (emphasis added).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    But in the 1995 New York Superior Court case, the court 
distinguished the CompuServe precedent. The reason the court offered 
was that unlike CompuServe, Prodigy sought to impose general rules of 
civility on its message boards and in its forums. While Prodigy had 
even more users than CompuServe and thus even less ability to screen 
material on its system, the fact it had announced rules of the road and 
occasionally enforced them was the judge's basis for subjecting it to 
liability that CompuServe didn't face.
    The perverse incentive this case established was clear: any 
provider of interactive computer services should avoid even modest 
efforts to moderate the content on its site. The inevitable 
consequences for the future of the Internet were equally clear: every 
website would be incentivized to follow CompuServe's model of 
``anything goes.'' Unless corrective action were taken the internet, 
already beginning to show some erosion in standards of public discourse 
that must inevitably arise when thousands and then millions of people 
engage in uninhibited public expression on any topic, would quickly 
become nothing but a sewer. When I read about this decision, I 
immediately set to work on drafting a bill to head off its predictable 
bad consequences.
Creating Section 230 and its goals
    The first person I turned to as a legislative partner on my 
proposed bill was then-Rep. Ron Wyden (D-OR). We had previously agreed 
to seek out opportunities for bipartisan legislation. As this was a 
novel question of policy that had not hardened into partisan 
disagreement (as was too often the case with so many other issues), we 
knew we could count on a fair consideration of the issues from our 
colleagues on both sides of the aisle.
    For the better part of a year, we conducted outreach and education 
on the challenging issues involved. In the process, we built not only 
overwhelming support, but also a much deeper understanding of the 
unique aspects of the Internet that require clear legal rules for it to 
function.
    The rule established in the Internet Freedom and Family Empowerment 
Act,\9\ which we introduced in June 1995, was crystal clear: the 
government would impose liability on criminals and tortfeasors for 
wrongful conduct. It would not shift that liability to third parties, 
because doing so would directly interfere with the essential 
functioning of the internet.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \9\ Internet Freedom and Family Empowerment Act, H.R. 1978, 104 
Cong. (1995).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Rep. Wyden and I were well aware that whether a person is involved 
in criminal or tortious conduct is in every case a question of fact. 
Simply because one operates a website, for example, does not mean that 
he or she cannot be involved in lawbreaking. To the contrary, as the 
last two decades of experience have amply illustrated, the internet--
like all other means of telecommunication and transportation--can be 
and often is used to facilitate illegal activity.
    Section 230 was written, therefore, with a clear fact-based test:

   Did the person create the content? If so, that person is 
        liable for any illegality.

   Did someone else create the content? Then that someone else 
        is liable.

   Did the person do anything to develop the content created by 
        another, even if only in part? If so, the person is liable 
        along with the content creator.

    The plain language of the statute directly covers the situation in 
which someone (or some company) is only partly involved in creating the 
content. Likewise, it covers the situation in which they did not create 
the content but were, at least in part, responsible for developing it. 
In both cases, Section 230 comes down hard on the side of law 
enforcement. A website operator involved only in part in content 
creation, or only in part in the development of content created by 
another, is nonetheless treated the same as the content creator.
    Here is the precise language of section 230 in this respect:

        The term ``information content provider'' means any person or 
        entity that is responsible, in whole or in part, for the 
        creation or development of information provided through the 
        Internet. . . .\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \10\ 47 USC Sec. 230(f) (emphasis added).

    These words in Section 230--``in part'' and ``development of''--are 
the most important part of the statute. That is because in enacting 
Section 230, it was not our intent to create immunity for criminal and 
tortious activity on the internet. To the contrary, our purpose (and 
that of every legislator who voted for the bill) was to ensure that 
innocent third parties will not be made liable for unlawful acts 
committed wholly by others.
    If an interactive computer service becomes complicit, in whole or 
in part, in the creation of illicit content--even if only by partly 
``developing'' the content--then it is entitled to no Section 230 
protection.
    Rep. Wyden and I knew that, in light of the volume of content that 
even in 1995 was crossing most Internet platforms, it would be 
unreasonable for the law to presume that the platform will screen all 
material. We also well understood the corollary of this principle: if 
in a specific case a platform actually did review material and edit it, 
then there would be no basis for assuming otherwise. As a result, the 
plain language of Section 230 deprives such a platform of immunity.
    We then created an exception to this deprivation of immunity, for 
what we called a ``Good Samaritan.'' \11\ If the purpose of one's 
reviewing content or editing it is to restrict obscene or otherwise 
objectionable content, then a platform will be protected. Obviously, 
this exception would not be needed if Section 230 provided immunity to 
those who only ``in part'' create or develop content.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \11\ 47 U.S.C. Sec. 230 (c)(2)(A).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The importance of Section 230 for user-generated content
    In simplest terms, Section 230 protects website operators that are 
not involved in content creation from liability for content created by 
third party users. Without it, websites would be exposed to lawsuits 
for everything from users' product reviews to book reviews. Yelp would 
be exposed to lawsuits for its users' negative comments about 
restaurants, and Tripadvisor could be sued for a user's disparaging 
review of a hotel. Any service that connects buyers and sellers, 
workers and employers, content creators and a platform, victims and 
victims' rights groups--or provides any other interactive engagement 
opportunity we can imagine--would face open-ended liability if it 
continued to display user-created content.
    How important is user-created content? Without it, it is hard to 
imagine how any of us would have made it this far through the Covid 
quarantines and self-isolation of 2020. Many contending with this 
year's devastating tornadoes--this is already the deadliest tornado 
season in the United States since 2011--could not have found their 
loved ones. This year more than ever, millions of Americans are relying 
on ``how to'' and educational videos for everything from healthcare to 
home maintenance. During the Covid crisis, online access to user-
created pre-K, primary, and secondary education and lifelong learning 
resources has proven a godsend for families across the country.
    Over 85 percent of businesses rely on user-created content on their 
websites.\12\ The vast majority of Americans feel more comfortable 
buying a product after researching user generated reviews,\13\ and over 
90 percent of consumers find user-generated content helpful in making 
their purchasing decisions.\14\ User generated content is vital to law 
enforcement and social services. Following the recent rioting in 
several U.S. cities, social workers have been able to match people with 
supplies and services to victims who needed life-saving help, directing 
them with real-time maps.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \12\ https://www.semrush.com/blog/50-stats-about-9-emerging-
content-marketing-trends-for-2016/
    \13\ Wu, Y. (2015). What Are Some Interesting Statistics About 
Online Consumer Reviews? Dr4ward.com. Available at: http://
www.dr4ward.com/dr4ward/2013/03/what-are-some-interesting-statistics-
about-online-consumer-reviews-infographic.html
    \14\ Kimberly Morrison, ``Why Consumers Share User-Generated 
Content,'' Adweek, May 17, 2016.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Protecting the innocent and punishing the guilty
    Throughout the history of the internet, Congress has sought to 
strike the right balance between opportunity and responsibility. 
Section 230 is such a balance--holding content creators liable for 
illegal activity while protecting Internet platforms from liability for 
content created entirely by others. At the same time, Section 230 does 
not protect platforms liable when they are complicit--even if only in 
part  in the creation or development of illegal content.
    The plain language of Section 230 makes clear its deference to 
criminal law. The entirety of Federal criminal law enforcement is 
unaffected by Section 230. So is all of state law that is consistent 
with the policy of Section 230.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \15\ 47 USC Sec. 230(e)(3).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Still, state law that is inconsistent with the aims of Section 230 
is preempted. Why did Congress choose this course? First, and most 
fundamentally, it is because the essential purpose of Section 230 is to 
establish a uniform Federal policy, applicable across the internet, 
that avoids results such as the state court decision in Prodigy.\16\ 
The Internet is the quintessential vehicle of interstate, and indeed 
international, commerce. Its packet-switched architecture makes it 
uniquely susceptible to multiple sources of conflicting state and local 
regulation, since even a message from one cubicle to its neighbor 
inside the same office can be broken up into pieces and routed via 
servers in different states.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \16\ Stratton Oakmont v. Prodigy Servs. Co., 1995 WL 323710 
(N.Y.Sup.Ct. May 24, 1995).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Were every state free to adopt its own policy concerning when an 
Internet platform will be liable for the criminal or tortious conduct 
of another, not only would compliance become oppressive, but the 
Federal policy itself could quickly be undone. All a state would have 
to do to defeat the Federal policy would be to place platform liability 
laws in its criminal code. Section 230 would then become a nullity. 
Congress thus intended Section 230 to establish a uniform Federal 
policy, but one that is entirely consistent with robust enforcement of 
state criminal and civil law.
    Despite the necessary preemption of inconsistent state laws, every 
state and every Federal prosecutor can successfully target online 
criminal activity by properly pleading that the defendant was at least 
partially involved in the creation of illegal content, or at least the 
later development of it. In all such cases, Section 230 immunity does 
not apply.
How Section 230 actually works
    The importance to millions of Americans of so many topics that 
Section 230 touches upon either directly or indirectly--for example, 
the responsibility of social media platforms to their users and the 
public; the ability of citizens to exercise their First Amendment 
rights; the ability of law enforcement to track down criminals; the 
protection of the privacy of every user of the internet--means that 
almost everyone has an opinion about Section 230 itself. But 
notwithstanding that Section 230 has become a household name, a 
complete understanding of how the law functions in practice, and what 
it actually does, is harder to come by. There are several 
misconceptions abroad that merit clarification.
    Some mistakenly claim that Section 230 prevents action against 
websites that knowingly engage in, solicit, or support illegal 
activity. This is simply wrong. But since this claim is often a 
principal basis for urging amendment of Section 230, it bears repeating 
that Section 230 provides no protection for any website, user, or other 
person or business involved even in part in the creation or development 
of content that is tortious or criminal.
    In the two and a half decades that Section 230 has been on the 
books, there have been hundreds of court decisions interpreting and 
applying it. It is now firmly established in the case law that Section 
230 cannot act as a shield whenever a website is in any way complicit 
in the creation or development of illegal content. In the landmark en 
banc decision of the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals in Fair Housing 
Council of San Fernando Valley v. Roommate.com,\17\ which has since 
been widely cited and applied across the United States, it was held 
that not only do websites lose their immunity when they merely 
``develop'' content created by others, but participation in others' 
content creation can be established by the wholly automated features of 
a website that are coded into its architecture.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \17\ 521 F.3d 1157, 1168 (9th Cir. 2008).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    There are many examples of courts faithfully applying the plain 
language of Section 230 to hold websites liable for complicity in the 
creation or development of illegal third-party content. In its 2016 
decision in Federal Trade Comm'n v. Leadclick Media, LLC,\18\ the 
Second Circuit Court of Appeals rejected a claim of Section 230 
immunity by an Internet marketer even though it did not create the 
illegal content at issue, and the content did not appear on its 
website. The court noted while this was so, the Internet marketer gave 
advice to the content creators. This made it complicit in the 
development of the illegal content, and so ineligible for Section 230 
immunity.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \18\ 838 F.3d 158 (2d Cir. 2016).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    In FTC v. Accusearch,\19\ the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals held 
that a website's mere posting of content that it had no role whatsoever 
in creating--telephone records of private individuals--constituted 
``development'' of that information, and so deprived it of Section 230 
immunity. Even though the content was wholly created by others, the 
website knowingly transformed what had previously been private 
information into a publicly available commodity. Such complicity in 
illegality was deemed to constitute ``development'' of the illegal 
content, as distinguished from its creation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \19\ 570 F.3d1187, 1197 (10th Cir. 2009).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Other notable examples of this now well-established feature of 
Section 230 are Enigma Software Group v. Bleeping Computer,\20\ in 
which a website was denied immunity despite the fact it did not create 
the unlawful content at issue, because of an implied agency 
relationship with an unpaid volunteer who did create it; and Alvi 
Armani Medical, Inc. v. Hennessey,\21\ in which the court deemed a 
website to be complicit in content creation because of its alleged 
knowledge that postings were being made under false identities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \20\ 194 F.Supp.3d 263 (2016).
    \21\ 629 F. Supp. 2d 1302 (S.D. Fla. 2008).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    In its 2016 decision in Jane Doe v. Backpage.com,\22\ however, the 
First Circuit Court of Appeals cast itself as an outlier, rejecting the 
holding in Roommate.com and its progeny. Instead, it held that ``claims 
that a website facilitates illegal conduct through its posting rules 
necessarily treat the website as a publisher or speaker of content 
provided by third parties and, thus, are precluded by section 
230(c)(1).'' \23\ This holding completely ignored the definition in 
subsection (f)(3) of Section 230, which provides that anyone--including 
a website--can be an ``information content provider'' if they are 
``responsible, in whole or in part, for the creation or development'' 
of online content. If a website's posting rules facilitate the 
development of illegal content, then the website becomes a content 
provider in its own right, and should be deprived of Section 230 
immunity.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \22\ Jane Doe No. 1, et al., v. Backpage.com LLC, et al., No. 15-
1724 (1st Cir. 2016).
    \23\ Id. (emphasis added).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Despite the fact that the First Circuit was an outlier in this 
respect, the notoriety of its decision in the Backpage case has given 
rise to the notion that Section 230 routinely operates as a shield 
against actual wrongdoing by websites. The opposite is the case. Courts 
since 2016 have consistently followed the Roommate precedent, and 
increasingly have expanded the circumstances in which they are willing 
to find websites complicit in the creation or development of illegal 
content provided by their users.
    Ironically, the actual facts in the Backpage case were a 
Technicolor display of complicity in the development of illegal 
content. Backpage knowingly concealed evidence of criminality by 
systematically editing its adult ads; it coached its users on how to 
post ``clean'' ads for illegal transactions; it deliberately edited ads 
in order to facilitate prostitution; it prescribed the language used in 
ads for prostitution; and it moderated content on the site, not for the 
purpose of removing ads for prostitution, but to camouflage them. It is 
difficult to imagine a clearer case of complicity ``in part, for the 
creation or development'' of illegal content.
    Happily, even within the First Circuit, this mistake has now been 
rectified. In the 2018 decision in Doe v. Backpage.com,\24\ a re-
pleading of the original claims by three new Jane Doe plaintiffs, the 
court held that allegations that Backpage changed the wording of third-
party advertisements on its site were sufficient to deem it an 
information content provider, and thus ineligible for Section 230 
immunity. Much heartache could have been avoided had these allegations 
concerning Backpage's complicity been sufficiently pleaded in the 
original case,\25\ and had the court reached this sensible and clearly 
correct decision on the law in the first place.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \24\ Doe No. 1 v. Backpage, 2018 WL 1542056 (D. Mass. March 29, 
2018).
    \25\ Although the plaintiffs disputed this, in the original case 
the First Circuit pointedly noted that the record before it expressly 
did not allege that Backpage contributed to the development of the sex 
trafficking content, even ``in part.'' Instead, the argument that 
Backpage was an ``information content provider'' under Section 230 was 
``forsworn'' in the district court and on appeal.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Another misguided notion is that Section 230 was never meant to 
apply to e-commerce. To the contrary, removing the threat to e-commerce 
represented by the Prodigy decision was an essential purpose in the 
development and enactment of Section 230.
    When Section 230 became law in 1996, user-generated content was 
already ubiquitous on the internet. The creativity being demonstrated 
by websites and users alike made it clear that online shopping was an 
enormously consumer-friendly use of the new technology. Features such 
as CompuServe's ``electronic mall'' and Prodigy's mail-order stores 
were instantly popular. So too were messaging and e-mail, which in 
Prodigy's case came with per-message transaction fees. Web businesses 
such as CheckFree demonstrated as far back as 1996 that online bill 
payment was not only feasible but convenient. Prodigy, America Online, 
and the fledgling Microsoft Network included features we know today as 
content delivery, each with a different payment system.
    Both Rep. Wyden and I had all of these iterations of Internet 
commerce in mind when we drafted our legislation. We made this plain 
during floor debate.\26\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \26\ See 141 Cong. Rec. H8468-72, H8478-79 (August 4, 1995).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Yet another misconception about the coverage of Section 230, often 
heard, is that it created one rule for online activity and a different 
rule for the same activity conducted offline. To the contrary, Section 
230 operates to ensure that like activities are always treated alike 
under the law.
    When Section 230 was written, just as now, each of the commercial 
applications flourishing online had an analog in the offline world, 
where each had its own attendant legal responsibilities. Newspapers 
could be liable for defamation. Banks and brokers could be held 
responsible for failing to know their customers. Advertisers were 
responsible under the Federal Trade Commission Act and state consumer 
laws for ensuring their content was not deceptive and unfair. 
Merchandisers could be held liable for neg-ligence and breach of 
warranty, and in some cases even subjected to strict liability for 
defective products.
    In writing Section 230, Rep. Wyden and I, and ultimately the entire 
Congress, decided that these legal rules should continue to apply on 
the Internet just as in the offline world. Every business, whether 
operating through its online facility or through a brick-and-mortar 
facility, would continue to be responsible for all of its legal 
obligations. What Section 230 added to the general body of law was the 
principle that an individual or entity operating a website should not, 
in addition to its own legal responsibilities, be required to monitor 
all of the content created by third parties and thereby become 
derivatively liable for the illegal acts of others. Congress recognized 
that to require otherwise would jeopardize the quintessential function 
of the internet: permitting millions of people around the world to 
communicate simultaneously and instantaneously. Congress wished to 
``embrace'' and ``welcome'' this not only for its commercial potential 
but also for ``the opportunity for education and political discourse 
that it offers for all of us.'' \27\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \27\ Id. at H8470.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The result is that websites are protected from liability for user-
created content, but only if they are wholly uninvolved in the creation 
or development of that content. Today, virtually every brick-and-mortar 
business of any kind, from newspapers to retailers to manufacturers to 
service providers, has an Internet presence through which it conducts 
e-commerce. Whether in the offline world or the internet, the same 
legal rules and responsibilities apply across the board to all.
    It is worth debunking three other ``creation myths'' about Section 
230.
    The first is that Section 230 was conceived as a way to protect an 
infant industry. According to this narrative, in the early days of the 
internet, Congress decided that small startups needed protection. Now 
that the Internet has matured, it is argued, the need for such 
protection no longer exists; Section 230 is no longer necessary.
    As co-author of the legislation, I can verify that this is an 
entirely fictitious narrative. Far from wishing to offer protection to 
an infant industry, our legislative aim was to recognize the sheer 
implausibility of requiring each website to monitor all of the user-
created content that crossed its portal each day. In the 1990s, when 
Internet traffic was measured in the tens of millions, this problem was 
already apparent. Today, in the second decade of the 21st century, the 
enormous growth in the volume of traffic on websites has made the 
potential consequences of publisher liability far graver. Section 230 
is needed for this purpose now, more than ever.
    The second ``creation myth'' is that Section 230 was adopted as a 
special favor to the tech industry, which lobbied for it on Capitol 
Hill and managed to wheedle it out of Congress by working the system. 
The reality is far different. In the mid-1990s, Internet commerce had 
very little presence in Washington. When I was moved to draft 
legislation to remedy the Prodigy decision, it was based on my reading 
news reports of the decision. No company or lobbyist contacted me. 
Throughout the process, Rep. Wyden and I heard barely at all from the 
leading Internet services of the day. This included both Prodigy and 
CompuServe, whose lawsuits inspired the legislation. As a result, our 
discussions of the proposed legislation with our colleagues in the 
House and Senate were unburdened by importunities from businesses 
seeking to gain a regulatory advantage over their competitors.
    I willingly concede that this was, therefore, a unique experience 
in my lawmaking career. It is also the opposite of what Congress should 
expect if it undertakes to amend Section 230, given that today millions 
of websites and more millions of Internet users have an identifiable 
stake in the outcome.
    The final creation myth is that Section 230 was part of a grand 
bargain with Senator James Exon (D-NE), in which his Communications 
Decency Act aimed at pornography was paired with the Cox-Wyden bill, 
the Internet Freedom and Family Empowerment Act, aimed at greenlighting 
websites to enforce content moderation policies without fear of 
liability. The claim now being made is that the two bills were actually 
like legislative epoxy, with one part requiring the other. And since 
the Exon legislation was subsequently invalidated as unconstitutional 
by the U.S. Supreme Court, so the argument goes, Section 230 should not 
be allowed to stand on its own.
    In fact, the revisionists contend, the primary congressional 
purpose back in 1996 was not to give Internet platforms limited 
immunity from liability as Section 230 does. Rather, the most important 
part of the imagined ``package'' was Senator Exon's radical idea of 
imposing stringent liability on websites for the illegal acts of 
others--an idea that Exon himself backed away from before his amendment 
was actually passed. Now, a quarter-century after the Supreme Court 
threw out the Exon bathwater, the neo-speech regulators are urging us 
to throw out the Section 230 baby along with it.
    The reality is far different than this revisionist history would 
have it. In fact, the Cox-Wyden bill was deliberately crafted as a 
rebuke of the Exon approach. When it came to the House floor for 
consideration, speaker after speaker rose to speak in support, and at 
the same time criticized the Exon approach. Rep. Zoe Lofgren (D-CA), 
the mother of 10- and 13-year-old children, shared her concerns with 
Internet pornography and noted that she had sponsored legislation 
mandating a life sentence for the creators of child pornography. But, 
she emphasized, ``Senator Exon's approach is not the right way. . . . 
It will not work.'' It was, she said, ``a misunderstanding of the 
technology.''
    Rep. Bob Goodlatte, a Virginia Republican, emphasized the potential 
the Internet offered and the threat to that potential from Exon-style 
regulation. ``We have the opportunity for every household in America, 
every family in America, soon to be able to have access to places like 
the Library of Congress, to have access to other major libraries of the 
world, universities, major publishers of information, news sources. 
There is no way,'' he said, ``that any of those entities, like Prodigy, 
can take the responsibility to edit out information that is going to be 
coming in to them from all manner of sources.''
    In the end, not a single representative spoke against the bill. The 
final roll call on the Cox-Wyden amendment was 420 yeas to 4 nays. It 
was a resounding rebuke to the Exon approach in his Communications 
Decency Act. The House then proceeded to pass its version of the 
Telecommunications Act--with the Cox-Wyden amendment, and without Exon.
    When the House and Senate met in conference on the 
Telecommunications Act, the House conferees sought to include Cox-Wyden 
and strike Exon. But political realities as well as policy details had 
to be dealt with. There was the sticky problem of 84 senators having 
already voted in favor of the Exon amendment. Once on record with a 
vote one way--particularly a highly visible vote on the politically 
charged issue of pornography--it would be very difficult for a 
politician to explain walking it back. The Senate negotiators, anxious 
to protect their colleagues from being accused of taking both sides of 
the question, stood firm. They were willing to accept Cox-Wyden, but 
Exon would have to be included, too. The House negotiators, all 
politicians themselves, understood. This was a Senate-only issue, which 
could be easily resolved by including both amendments in the final 
product. It was logrolling at its best.
    Perhaps part of the enduring confusion about the relationship of 
Section 230 to Senator Exon's legislation has arisen from the fact that 
when legislative staff prepared the House-Senate conference report on 
the final Telecommunications Act, they grouped both Exon's 
Communications Decency Act and the Internet Freedom and Family 
Empowerment Act into the same legislative title. So the Cox-Wyden 
amendment became Section 230 of the Communications Decency Act--the 
very piece of legislation it was designed to counter. Ironically, now 
that the original CDA has been invalidated, it is Ron's and my 
legislative handiwork that forever bears Senator Exon's label.
Measuring the PACT Act and Other Pending Federal Legislation Against 
        the Goals Section 230 Is Meant to Achieve
    When Congress enacted what we know today as Section 230 by near-
unanimous votes in the House and the Senate, there was broad agreement 
on several basic principles. Some of these are set forth in the law's 
preamble; others are set forth in the operational portion of the 
statute. These basic tenets are as follows:

  The wide array of interactive educational and informational 
        services available to individual Americans via the Internet 
        represents an extraordinary resource worth preserving.

  The ideal way to control the flow of information on the 
        internet, and to screen wanted from unwanted information, is 
        not for government to regulate that flow, but rather for each 
        individual user to have the greatest possible control over what 
        they receive.

  The fact that the Internet is not centrally controlled and 
        regulated, but largely comprised of content created by millions 
        of individual users, makes it a global forum for a true 
        diversity of political discourse, unique opportunities for 
        cultural development, and myriad avenues for intellectual 
        activity.

  The Internet has flourished, to the benefit of all Americans 
        who rely upon it for a variety of political, educational, 
        cultural, and entertainment services, with a minimum of 
        government regulation.

  Content moderation aimed at keeping websites free from 
        obscenity, stalking, harassment, terrorism, criminal activity, 
        and other objectionable content and behavior should not be 
        penalized by exposing those websites who undertake it to 
        increased liability for their efforts.

    Twenty-four years later, while the Internet itself has changed in 
many ways, these fundamental principles remain sound. The task for 21st 
century lawmakers is to determine whether these goals are being 
achieved, and to explore ways to address any shortcomings. Remedial 
legislation, if it is found warranted, should seek to preserve and 
extend the benefits that Congress overwhelmingly agreed can and should 
be forthcoming from the internet. Accordingly, any new bill with the 
goal of updating Section 230 or related areas of Federal law should be 
measured against this template.
    In the current Congress, a number of bills have been introduced in 
both chambers dealing directly or indirectly with content moderation. 
These include S. 3398, the EARN IT Act; S. 1914, the Ending Support for 
Internet Censorship Act; H. R. 4027, the Stop the Censorship Act; S. 
3983, the Limiting Section 230 Immunity to Good Samaritans Act; and 
S.4062, Stopping Big Tech's Censorship Act. In this committee, you are 
considering the Platform Accountability and Consumer Transparency Act 
(PACT Act), which is aimed at increasing transparency of content 
moderation policies and ensuring that knowing participation in criminal 
activity is punishable to the full extent of the law. These are worthy 
objectives and I commend the committee for prioritizing them.
PACT Act
    Considering the PACT Act in light of the original purposes of 
Section 230, I offer the following observations.
    First, the PACT Act itself embraces the important policy objectives 
set out in the original Section 230. It repeats Section 230's intention 
to preserve and encourage the continued technological advancement of 
the internet, in recognition of the substantial benefits the Internet 
provides both to consumers and to the overall economy. The bill also 
highlights the fact that people throughout the United States rely on 
the Internet for a wide variety of things, including communicating with 
friends and loved ones as well as the wider world; gathering 
information from others and broadcasting their own creations; and 
conducting commercial transactions of endless variety.
    Plainly, the purpose of these declarations in the PACT Act is to 
set out an overarching objective of ensuring that these benefits aren't 
comprised. This is an aspiration I wholeheartedly endorse. It is also a 
useful standard against which to measure the operational portions of 
the bill.
    Finally, the preamble to the PACT Act declares that free expression 
is an essential feature of the Internet that should be protected. The 
bill recognizes that the Internet is a uniquely successful facilitator 
of communications now essential to economic, political, social, and 
cultural life in America and around the world. This essential 
characteristic of the internet, which arises from its decentralized 
architecture that permits millions (indeed billions) of users to 
interact in real time, was of great importance to me and to the other 
members of Congress in the mid-1990s when we enacted Section 230. In 
this respect, the PACT Act and Section 230, at least insofar as their 
ultimate aims, are aligned.
    The bill is divided into three main parts, dealing with 
transparency, liability, and enforcement. I will address each one in 
order. Before doing so, I should note several things the bill doesn't 
do. In each case, in my judgment, the decision of the PACT Act authors 
to avoid going down these paths reflects the better part of wisdom.
    Encryption: The bill eschews the approach of the original version 
of the EARN IT bill, which had the potential to compromise existing 
consumer privacy protections by raising the possibility that encryption 
designed to be secure against everyone except the user who holds the 
key might expose platforms to new liability. It is a noble legislative 
aim to incentivize creation of a technically feasible means of ``lawful 
access'' that only the government could exploit, but cybersecurity is a 
constant game of cat-and-mouse in which bad actors are constantly 
outwitting the latest protections. Despite best efforts, the U.S. 
government has been hacked many times, and millions of people have lost 
sensitive information as a result, including not only their Social 
Security numbers but also detailed private information about their law 
enforcement, medical, financial, and employment records containing such 
highly protected data as fingerprints and mental health diagnoses, as 
well as equally personal information on children and other family 
members. The Pentagon, the SEC, HHS, the Executive Office of the 
President, and several member departments and agencies within the 
intelligence community have been penetrated.
    In many cases these successful exploits of U.S. government security 
have been accomplished by sophisticated foreign actors with state 
sponsorship.
    Congress most certainly should be examining how law enforcement 
aims can be achieved in tandem with rigorous protection of individual 
Americans' privacy. But leaping into that morass with mandates or 
penalties that require the creation of ``backdoors,'' before the 
technology exists to guarantee that the backdoors will not themselves 
become the means of illegal exploitation, is premature.
    Political Neutrality: As distinct from S. 1914 and S. 4062, the 
PACT Act does not condition Section 230 protections for websites 
hosting user-created content on their being ``politically neutral.'' 
Ensuring that the Internet remains ``a global forum for a true 
diversity of political discourse'' requires that government allow a 
thousand flowers to bloom--not that a single website has to represent 
every conceivable point of view. Section 230 does not require political 
neutrality, and was never intended to do so. Were it otherwise, to use 
an obvious example, neither the Democratic National Committee nor the 
Republican National Committee websites would pass a political 
neutrality test. Government-compelled speech is not the way to ensure 
diverse viewpoints. Permitting websites to choose their own viewpoints 
is.
    Websites that choose to be politically neutral, and hold themselves 
out as such, can be held to this standard. When an Internet platform 
promises its customers--through its advertising, published community 
standards, and terms of service--that its content moderation policy is 
politically neutral, then that promise can be enforced both by the 
government and civil litigants under existing Federal and state laws. 
This is far different than a mandate of political neutrality, with the 
judgment of what is and is not ``neutral'' placed in the hands of 
political appointees in Washington. The PACT Act wisely shuns this 
approach.
    Subjective Standards: Several commentators have urged grafting onto 
Section 230 a requirement, derived from negligence law, upon which 
existing protections for content moderation would be conditioned. 
Typically taking the form of a ``duty of care'' or a ``reasonableness'' 
standard, the proposals would effectively make every complaint that a 
website has failed to meet the standard into a question of fact. Since 
such fact disputes can only be resolved after evidentiary discovery 
(depositions of witnesses, written interrogatories, subpoenas of 
documents, and so forth), no longer could a website prove itself 
eligible for dismissal of a case at an early stage. An essential 
feature of Section 230 is its objective standard: was the allegedly 
illegal material created or developed--in whole or in part--by the 
website? If the complaint adequately alleges this, then the website can 
be treated as a publisher and held liable for the material; otherwise 
not.
    Without an objective standard to determine whether lawsuits can 
proceed, a website would constantly be exposed to open-ended, multi-
year litigation over any or all of the user-created content it hosts. 
The defining characteristic of the internet--the convergence of many 
(frequently millions and occasionally billions) of users on a single 
platform--means that a website would have no way to protect itself from 
a multiplicity of such lawsuits, short of scaling back or eliminating 
user-created content. Currently, civil suits in the Federal system that 
proceed beyond a motion to dismiss on the pleadings last an average of 
three years through trial; appeals can consume years more. For this 
reason, over 90 percent of cases settle without a judge or jury 
actually applying the law to the facts in their case. The mere filing 
of a lawsuit in such circumstances can create significant settlement 
value for a plaintiff. The fact that a typical website could easily 
face hundreds or even thousands of such suits illustrates the severity 
of the threat to the functioning of the Internet itself.
    The PACT Act does not seek to graft subjective negligence-type 
concepts such as a duty of care onto the currently objective criteria 
in Section 230. Because ensuring that Section 230 can be applied by 
courts at the motion to dismiss stage is essential to achieving its 
purposes, this is an important conceptual pitfall for any remedial 
legislation to avoid.
    Monitoring User-Created Content: Essential to the functioning of 
the internet, and to reaping the benefits of its characteristic feature 
of real-time communication among unlimited numbers of users, is that 
websites hosting content do not have to monitor every piece of content. 
The sheer volume of communications arising from a planetary base of 
potential users makes this an unreasonable requirement. Even if a 
website could somehow staff up to meet this near-impossible burden, 
doing so would ensure that Internet communications via that platform 
could not proceed in real time. Nonetheless, several legislative 
proposals would impose potential legal liability on websites that could 
only be avoided by constant monitoring of all user-created content. 
This is a situation that Section 230 was intended to prevent. The PACT 
Act wisely avoids the imposition of a monitoring requirement, and 
indeed contains language in section 5 stating that monitoring or 
``affirmative fact-seeking'' is not required in connection with 
complaints received. (A similar disclaimer should be added to the bill 
to clarify that such an obligation does not exist in any case, whether 
in connection with a complaint or not.)
    Takedown Based on Private Accusations: Several commentators have 
recommended that U.S. law be amended to require, following the model of 
the Digital Millennium Copyright Act, the mandatory takedown of content 
once a website has been notified that it is defamatory or otherwise 
violative of law. Such a requirement would empower anyone willing to 
allege defamation to require the immediate removal of speech with which 
they disagree. The PACT Act avoids this pitfall. Instead, its 
requirement of mandatory takedown of illegal content and conduct 
applies only when that content or conduct has been determined by a 
court to be violative of law. While there are other issues created by 
the language in the bill as drafted, the legislative choice not to 
create opportunities for the exercise of a ``heckler's veto'' is the 
correct one.
    Internet Infrastructure Services: Section 230 defines the term 
``interactive computer service'' broadly, because it was intended that 
the law's protections extend broadly to ensure that content moderation 
and free expression would be protected. If Congress decides to use 
Section 230 as a vehicle for placing new burdens and liabilities on web 
platforms, care should be taken to distinguish between them and the 
Internet infrastructure providers that are swept within the broad 
definition of ``interactive computer service.'' For example, DNS 
registries do not operate content publishing platforms and indeed have 
no direct relationships with end users of the internet. As 
infrastructure providers, they are very different from social media 
platforms and search engines. The PACT Act does not attempt to regulate 
Internet infrastructure providers, and indeed the bill includes 
language forswearing this with respect to web hosting, domain 
registration, content delivery networks, caching, back-end data 
storage, and cloud management. This distinction between websites and 
Internet infrastructure providers is an important one to make.
    Turning now to the PACT Act's three main sections, and taking them 
in order, I offer the following comments and suggestions.
Transparency
    Transparency--meaning disclosure to consumers, regulators, 
stakeholders, and the public generally of how a platform moderates 
content--is a sound objective. The PACT Act's prioritization of 
transparency is unquestionably constructive and consistent with Section 
230 and its ultimate aims.
    The mechanisms through which the bill would promote transparency 
include statutory standards for each website's content moderation 
policy; mandatory complaint systems for each website that include toll-
free call-in services and web-based mechanisms, to be used when 
websites fail to meet the content moderation standards; required notice 
and hearing, including a right to appeal, for each complaint received; 
and mandatory recordkeeping and reporting of content moderation 
decisions and disposition of complaints. In addition, the Federal Trade 
Commission is given authority to enforce the statutory standards and 
the content moderation policies of every website.
    While overall these provisions could be made to be workable, as 
drafted they will run afoul of the objectives of Section 230 and 
threaten the smooth functioning of the Internet and the currently 
robust environment for user-created content.
    `Potentially policy-violating content': Specifically, section 5 of 
the bill includes in its mandates for an ``acceptable use policy'' the 
requirement that websites provide due process notices, hearings, and 
appeals in response to every complaint that third-party content 
``potentially'' violates the website's community standards. There are 
three problems with this approach.
    First, the website's own standards may or may not be admirable from 
a public policy perspective. Given that--so long as the statutory 
requirements concerning illegal content and activity are met--websites 
are free to adopt whatever content policies they wish, it is reasonable 
to assume that some websites will welcome content that, while legal, 
the government would not wish to promote. Any government-mandated 
complaint system should therefore be focused not on the purely 
voluntary and idiosyncratic aspects of each website's content policies, 
but rather on illegal content and illegal activity. This would amply 
cover not only criminal conduct and content involving sex trafficking, 
child sexual abuse material, terrorism, illegal drug dealing, stalking, 
and so forth, but also the wide range of Federal and state civil 
offenses including defamation and invasion of privacy.
    Second, the bill's extension of its due process mandate to cover 
not only actual violations of each website's policy, but also potential 
violations, introduces a subjective concept that will be easily abused. 
Currently, Section 230 permits a court in most cases to judge whether 
or not the law applies at an early stage, based on the pleadings. This 
ensures that the mere lodging of a complaint does not trigger elaborate 
expense for the website--particularly important given the volume of 
user-created content often handled by even the smallest websites. By 
reducing what must be alleged in a telephone or e-mail complaint to the 
mere possibility that content or activity could potentially violate the 
website's policy, the PACT Act as written would make it trivially easy 
for anyone to trigger the notice-and-hearing requirements contained in 
section 5.
    Third, the imposition of such a broad notice-and-hearing 
requirement, which would apply in almost every case given the lax and 
subjective standard for triggering it, will expose websites to 
significant expense. (Combined with the high volume of hearings and 
appeals the bill's subjective standard will generate, its requirement 
that every complaint be initially researched, analyzed, and disposed of 
within 14 days will make compliance still more expensive.) Websites 
will naturally seek to avoid or at least minimize this greater expense.
    If almost every complaint requires a hearing and triggers notice 
requirements and guarantees an appeal, then the only way to minimize 
the associated expense will be to reduce the grounds for complaints to 
be filed. Since every website will have control over the specifics of 
its content moderation policy, the incentive will be to minimize the 
number of moderation decisions required, through the adoption of less-
robust moderation policies. Alternatively, websites could reduce or 
eliminate user-created content. Section 230, on the other hand, is 
intended to protect and encourage content moderation, and to facilitate 
users' ability to publish their content on the internet. In these ways, 
the inclusion of allegedly ``potentially policy-violating content'' as 
a trigger for mandatory hearings and appeals is at odds with the stated 
goals of Section 230 and the PACT Act itself.
    To better align section 5 with the PACT Act's own stated 
objectives, therefore, it should be amended to eliminate ``potentially 
policy-violating content'' wherever it appears. In addition to 
remedying the problems noted, this would also conform section 5 with 
the intermediary liability provisions in section 6, which are focused 
on illegal content and activity, and not on ``potentially policy-
violating content.''
    Data collection and reporting: The specific requirements for data 
collection and quarterly public reporting based thereon, as set forth 
in section 5 of the bill, include the following:

   1.  The number of user complaints about specific content

   2.  The number of employee flags about specific content

   3.  The number of contractor flags about specific content

   4.  The number of internal automated flags about specific content

   5.  The number of government flags about specific content

   6.  The number of flags about specific content from other service 
        providers

   7.  The number of flags from outside personnel employed or 
        contracted by other service providers

   8.  The country of each provider of content that is subject to a 
        complaint or flag

   9.  The number of times each specific rule within the website's 
        content policy was violated

  10.  The number of times the website took one of the following 
        actions with respect to content:

      a)  content removal

      b)  content demonetization

      c)  content deprioritization

      d)  appending content with an assessment

      e)  account suspension

      f)  account removal

  11.  The number of appeals of decisions on complaints about specific 
        content

  12.  The number of appeals that resulted in restoration of content 
        previously removed

  13.  Each mechanism used to enforce the website's content policy, 
        including:

      a)  Software and hardware tools

      b)  General practices

      c)  Specific actions

      d)  Proprietary techniques \28\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \28\ There is an additional requirement that websites report their 
actions with respect to questionable content, categorized by 
``coordinated campaign, if applicable.'' See section 5(d)(2)(B)(iv) of 
the bill. It is not at all clear what this means.

    This ongoing data collection burden would be placed on every 
website in America with an average daily number of visitors of more 
than 33,333 and $12 million in annual revenue, thereby sweeping in 
thousands of small businesses that would have to comply.\29\ As onerous 
as the data collection and reporting could be for such websites, the 
burden would grow exponentially with the size of the platform. The 
largest social media platforms, Facebook, Twitter, and Yahoo, remove 
about three billion posts and accounts every 90 days. The number of 
``deprioritization'' decisions, given the daily and even moment-to-
moment automated adjustments that would be encompassed within that 
rubric, would be far higher. The requirement to maintain detailed 
recordkeeping for all of this for every individual piece of content, 
which would then become the basis for public reports that would have to 
be scrubbed for accuracy before publication, would impose a daunting 
logistical and economic tax on all but the smallest websites.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \29\ This is a very low threshold. By comparison, the Small 
Business Association defines a small business as one with less than $35 
million in annual revenue. See 13 CFR Sec. 121.201. The PACT Act's 
implicit definition of a ``large'' business would sweep in websites 
one-third the size of what the SBA considers to be a small business.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The disincentives to do content monitoring at all that would 
accompany these costly impositions would pose a genuine threat to the 
goals that both Section 230, and ostensibly the PACT Act itself, are 
aimed at achieving.
    Beyond the sheer burden of compliance with this extensive mandate, 
the language in the bill poses interpretive challenges. None of the 
terms used in the long list of categories to be tracked is defined. 
While ``content demonetization'' has some meaning in common parlance as 
it relates to Google, for the 875 million other websites in America 
that is likely not the case. The same can be said for ``content 
deprioritization.'' Depending upon the website's particular business 
model, the term might have no application at all; alternatively, each 
website might be left to define the term for themselves, with endless 
different variations on the theme. The lack of rigor in drafting this 
section of the bill would make compliance, already destined to be 
expensive and burdensome, needlessly more so.
Liability
    The PACT Act would amend Section 230 to deny the law's protection 
to any website that fails to ``remove . . . illegal content or stop 
illegal activity'' within 24 hours of ``acquiring . . . knowledge'' of 
it.
    It is clear what is intended here. Conduct and content that are in 
and of themselves illegal should be kept off of all websites subject to 
the jurisdiction of the United States. That is an unassailable 
objective. It is also perfectly consistent with the congressional 
purposes in enacting Section 230 in the first place. Section 230 was 
never intended to provide a shield for illegal activity.
    Notwithstanding the authors' clear purpose, the actual language in 
section 6 of the bill creates needless ambiguity that will frustrate 
achievement of that purpose. Happily, sturdier language in the same 
section of the bill can be used to clarify some of this unintended 
ambiguity.
    The first drafting problem inheres in the bill's reliance on 
``knowledge'' as the trigger for the 24-hour takedown deadline. 
``Knowledge'' is a subjective standard that requires an assessment of 
state of mind. ``Notice'' is an objective standard, which if 
substituted for ``knowledge'' in this context would eliminate any 
subjectivity and at the same time fully achieve the authors' objective. 
The bill attempts to undo its own use of the subjective term by 
defining ``knowledge'' to mean ``notice.'' This creates needless 
interpretive risk. Since section 6 of the bill already contains a 
detailed definition of ``notice'' that amply serves the purpose, all 
that is needed is to change the proposed amendment to Section 230 to 
require that the website ``has notice of the illegal content or illegal 
activity, as provided in subparagraph (B).''
    The second drafting problem concerns the loose description of what 
the notice must contain by way of identifying specific illegal content. 
The bill states only that the notice must contain ``information 
reasonably sufficient'' to locate the content. Failing to include 
specific, clear minimum requirements that will in each case guarantee 
that the website will be able to locate the offending material 
virtually guarantees that disputes will arise. Clarity in this respect 
is particularly important given the very short 24-hour deadline for 
compliance. (Indeed, as millions of websites are not staffed 24/7 or on 
weekends, that deadline will in many cases be unrealistic.)
    The third drafting problem is the definition of ``illegal.'' The 
bill defines ``illegal'' content and activity to be that which a court 
has ``determined to violate Federal law or state defamation law.'' 
While tightly circumscribing mandatory takedowns to court-adjudicated 
cases is a wise legislative choice, more clarity is required here to 
specify what constitutes a court determination. Must it be a final 
judgment? Must it await the expiration of appeals? And whichever 
definition is adopted, what is the rationale? These are questions the 
bill's authors must directly confront and resolve. From the standpoint 
of websites that will have to comply with this short-fuse takedown 
requirement, clarity is more important than the particular answer 
Congress might settle upon.
    From the standpoint of policy makers in Congress, however, which 
answer you choose is indeed important. Consider that many individuals 
hostile to others' speech are litigious. The automatic operation of 
this provision of the PACT Act--mandatory takedown after 24 hours' 
notice--means that it will be a sure-fire way to suppress speech on the 
internet. In the case of speech involving important public policy 
issues, by way of example, should a lower court victory be enough? And 
what of default judgments, where by definition the arguments on the 
other side have not been fully considered? What of the deliberate 
falsification of court orders? (The bill contains no sanction for such 
activity.) Careful weighing of the tradeoffs here will be necessary to 
ensure that the objectives of protecting free expression and 
eliminating illegality from the Internet are simultaneously vindicated.
Enforcement
    Section 230 was drafted with the intention of protecting the 
innocent from being held liable for wrongs committed by others. It was 
equally intended to ensure that those who actually commit wrongs will 
be subject to prosecution by both civil and criminal law enforcement. 
One need not rely on the legislative history or the words of the 
authors for this proposition. The language of the statute is plain 
enough. If a website, or anyone who provides what the law describes as 
interactive computer services, is complicit in the creation of unlawful 
content then it may not claim protection under Section 230. The PACT 
Act would undo this arrangement. Instead, Section 230 would be waived 
entirely whenever the Federal government or a state attorney general is 
the litigant. In every such case, websites would lose the protection 
offered by Section 230.
    The only conceivable justification for depriving every website of 
their existing protection under Federal law in this way is that state 
attorney generals and Federal prosecutors are presumed always to be 
right, and websites in such cases are presumed always to be wrong. If 
so, one wonders why a trial would ever be necessary. In my experience 
as head of a Federal agency charged with civil law enforcement, the 
agency was--in the judgment of the courts--more often right than wrong, 
but hardly infallible. A number of Federal departments and agencies in 
recent years, including the Department of Justice, have been chastised 
by courts for violating ethical norms in the cases they bring and in 
the way they have prosecuted them. State attorneys general are all 
elected political figures involved in political fundraising that 
frequently presents conflicts of interest. A blanket presumption that 
the government is always right is too slender a reed on which to rest 
an across-the-board statutory repeal of Section 230's essential 
provisions.
    There is no reason that Federal and state prosecutors cannot 
enforce all of their laws without need of such a wholesale waiver of 
Section 230. Indeed, Section 230 itself states that ``Nothing in this 
section shall be construed to prevent any State from enforcing any 
State law that is consistent with this section.'' So unless flat-out 
rejection of the very purpose of Section 230 is the objective, the PACT 
Act should not follow this course. Rather than the blunderbuss approach 
of simply waiving away the entirety of Section 230 for government 
litigants, it would be far wiser to more fully accommodate state law 
enforcement interests through an express statutory authorization to 
state attorneys general to enforce not only state laws consistent with 
Section 230, but Federal laws as well. This would multiply the 
potential for enforcement actions to keep illegal content off of the 
internet.
    Such an authorization could be modeled on the existing provision in 
28 U.S.C. Sec. 543 empowering the Department of Justice to appoint 
participating state Attorneys General as ``Special Attorneys.'' This 
authority of the Attorney General to appoint ``Special Attorneys'' 
dates to 1966. (The statutory authority was most recently amended in 
2010.) The internal Department of Justice authority appears in the 
United States Attorneys Manual (USAM) at USAM Sec. 3-2-200. The 
authority is very broad, and the terms of the appointment are entirely 
negotiable. In this way, every state Attorney General who wishes to do 
so could exercise the full authority not only of his or her state law, 
but also Federal law. As Section 230 has no application to Federal 
criminal law, any theoretical arguments about its application to a 
given state prosecution will immediately evaporate.
S. 3398, EARN IT
    The most recent version of the EARN IT bill was reported from the 
Senate Judiciary Committee on July 20. As amended in committee, the 
bill would make several changes to Federal law affecting Section 230 
and content moderation. The amended bill, like its predecessor, 
continues to present several serious issues, including constitutional 
infirmities that could create opportunities for child abusers to escape 
justice by demanding that the most damning evidence be excluded from 
their trials.
    The bill would mandate the establishment of Federal standards, 
referred to in the bill as ``best practices,'' that would cover, among 
other things, the following specific ways that websites and Internet 
infrastructure providers should be involved in content moderation. 
While the bill's focus is content related to child sexual exploitation, 
the ``best practices'' would necessarily extend to all content prior to 
its screening and identification as child sexual exploitation material. 
The Federal standards to be promulgated would include requirements for 
websites and Internet infrastructure providers to:

   1.  Preserve on their servers specified user-created content

   2.  Take down specified user-created content

   3.  Report to law enforcement and others specified user-created 
        content

   4.  Record and preserve location data for users

   5.  Record and preserve other personal identifiable information 
        concerning users

   6.  Develop and maintain an online service for accepting reports 
        from the public concerning specified user-created content

   7.  Develop and maintain an internal system for sorting, 
        prioritizing, and allocating resources to complaints and 
        reports received through the online public reporting system

   8.  Implement a ``standard rating and categorization system'' to 
        identify specified types of user-created content

   9.  Train content moderators according to the Federal standards to 
        be promulgated

  10.  Provide certain specified levels of support to content 
        moderators devoted to searching for online child sexual 
        exploitation material

  11.  Produce reports to the government covering:

      a)  the entity's policies and procedures for ``identifying, 
            categorizing, and reporting'' online child sexual 
            exploitation

      b)  the entity's efforts ``to prevent and disrupt'' online child 
            sexual exploitation

  12.  Coordinate with ``voluntary initiatives'' related to 
        identifying, categorizing, and reporting specified user-created 
        content

  13.  Implement ``age rating'' and ``age gating'' systems covering all 
        online content

  14.  Develop ``parental control products'' to limit the types of 
        websites, social media platforms, and Internet content that can 
        be accessed

  15.  Amend contracts with third parties, contractors, and affiliates 
        to require their compliance with the Federal standards

  16.  Develop internal operational practices operational practices to 
        ``ensure'' that third parties, contractors, and affiliates 
        comply with the Federal standards

    This is an elaborate list of both wide-ranging and granular 
requirements. Yet despite its breadth and granularity, the broad 
discretion to elaborate upon these themes--which is entirely given over 
to an ad hoc commission created by the bill--would authorize the 
promulgation of different or additional requirements that neither 
Congress nor the regulated community can predict. The specifics of such 
requirements as the mandatory takedown of user-created content are of 
enormous importance; yet they are nowhere defined in the bill, and the 
process for determining them would be wholly within the control of an 
unaccountable group of political appointees.
    The several instances of requiring ``searching for'' specified 
user-created content, the requirement to store and preserve it, and the 
requirement to undertaking affirmative efforts to ``prevent and 
disrupt'' users' activity, together amount to a wide-ranging duty to 
monitor all incoming user-created content. It would otherwise not be 
possible to find what the websites are instructed look for; necessarily 
the entire haystack must be searched to find the needle. As protecting 
websites from having to monitor all user-created content is a 
fundamental purpose of Section 230, the EARN IT bill fails in this 
essential respect.
    One would hope that, given the deeply intrusive nature of the EARN 
IT bill's proposed regulation of the businesses of millions of U.S.-
based websites, as well as the extension of that regulation beyond 
websites and consumer-facing Internet platforms to a wide variety of 
Internet infrastructure providers, the Congress would be more 
solicitous of information concerning how its intended new standards 
would actually operate in the real world. While charging the commission 
to consider issues of cost and feasibility, there is no check on what 
the commission can actually prescribe.
    Worse, there is no requirement for public input. Ordinarily, when 
Federal agencies promulgate rules, they are first subjected to public 
notice and opportunity to comment under the Administrative Procedure 
Act. When commissions are created to advise the executive branch, they 
are typically subjected to the requirements of the Federal Advisory 
Committee Act, which similarly ensures public transparency and input. 
But the EARN IT bill freezes out the public from any right of 
participation in the process of developing the new Federal standards. 
Instead, a commission comprised of politically-appointed individuals 
will have free rein to determine what Federal ``best practices'' are, 
without need of complying with either the APA or FACA. Among other 
things, this makes it far more likely that whatever standards are 
promulgated will be uninformed by considerations of how they will, or 
will not, function in practice.
    Were I still a member of Congress, I would insist that, before this 
legislation proceeds further, it be amended to require the standard 
public notice and input that is expected for all Federal rulemakings.
    Beyond the direct impact on websites from the significant 
compliance burdens that would attend compliance with these elaborate 
new Federal standards, the consequences for every American who uses the 
Internet would be more severe. Whereas today we take for granted the 
fact that our posts and communications via the Internet will be 
communicated instantaneously, compliance with the new requirements will 
mean that many user posts will have to be held in suspense, pending 
review by the website's legal team. Moreover, any user post that create 
risks to the platform is not likely to survive scrutiny, so that some 
messages will never be communicated at all. These unintended 
consequences will mark an unwelcome curtailing of the ease and speed 
with which Americans share their news and views online today.
    Other aspects of the EARN It bill specifically touching upon 
Section 230 raise different issues.
    The amended EARN IT Act carves out a wholesale exception to the law 
that extends to any claim made in a civil suit under any state law, 
provided it can be related to child sexual abuse material. The broad 
scope of the exception--it waives Section 230 state preemption 
completely--will make it an attractive exploitative opportunity for 
artful pleading. At a minimum, tightening up the language describing 
which claims are covered by the exception is required. The language in 
the PACT Act authorizing enforcement of Federal civil laws by state 
attorneys general is far preferable in this respect. It requires that 
the underlying claim must also allege a violation of Federal law.
    An even more serious problem with this across-the-board waiver of 
Section 230 for all suits based on state laws is that the statutes of 
several states lack an actual knowledge standard. Instead, they 
predicate liability on recklessness. As a result, every website would 
be exposed to new lawsuits alleging that it was reckless in failing to 
actively monitor all user-created content. It is not difficult to 
imagine that such lawsuits could be successful. This would effectively 
impose a nationwide requirement of a duty to monitor--a result that 
Congress should wish to avoid, and that Section 230 was intended to 
prevent..
    Since not only the new Federal standards but also the state-law 
litigation waived in by the EARN IT bill will strongly encourage 
monitoring and reporting, there will be new risks of constitutional 
challenges to criminal prosecutions using evidence reported in this 
way. Whereas under current law, companies are required only to report 
known instances of child sexual abuse material, EARN IT constitutes 
government inducement to actively search for it, and then turn it over 
for use by the government in prosecutions. This raises the prospect the 
what are now private searches would be deemed state action, subject to 
Fourth Amendment scrutiny.
    With the exception of the 10th Circuit Court of Appeals (in an 
opinion written by then-Judge Neil Gorsuch),\30\ most courts have held 
that the mandatory reporting arrangement under current law does not 
amount to state action, because the actual search that precedes the 
discovery of the evidence is done voluntarily.\31\ But under applicable 
Supreme Court precedent, private searches are subject to the Fourth 
Amendment not only when the government requires a search, but when it 
merely encourages searches. And under the Exclusionary Rule, evidence 
collected in violation of the Fourth Amendment is generally 
inadmissible in court.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \30\ United States v. Ackerman, 831 F.3d 1292, 1302 (10th Cir. 
2016). see also, e.g., United States v. Coyne, 387 F.Supp.3d.
    \31\ See, e.g. United States v. Coyne, 387 F.Supp.3d.387 (2018).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The risk posed by the EARN IT bill, therefore, is that evidence 
otherwise available to convict child abusers could now be 
suppressed.\32\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \32\ See Chris Marchese, The EARN IT Act's Collision Course With 
The Fourth Amendment (2020), https://netchoice.org/wp-content/uploads/
2020/06/EARN-It-4A-Report-FINAL.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    A further issue is that the amended EARN IT bill still threatens 
the privacy protections that websites can extend to their users. While 
the original version of the EARN IT bill posed a more direct threat to 
encryption, the amended version continues to give broad authority to 
its ad hoc commission to promulgate Federal standards that would give 
the government a ``back door''--for example, by requiring websites to 
scan all data before and after encryption \33\ or specifying that 
device manufacturers create custom operating systems allowing 
government access. (This is not idle speculation: the FBI attempted to 
convince Apple to do this four years ago.)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \33\ As one observer has noted, the popular euphemism for this--
``client-side scanning''--is what we would otherwise call ``reading 
your messages on your device.'' Carl Szabo, ``The EARN IT Act threatens 
encryption,'' Orange County Register (July 14, 2020).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Finally, beyond these significant problems, the EARN IT bill's 
carveout for child sexual abuse material presents the same overall 
conceptual issue that was present during consideration of FOSTA/SESTA. 
The sexual exploitation of minors is a serious crime punishable under 
both Federal and state law. But it is one of approximately 4,000 
Federal crimes and thousands more state law crimes that include 
terrorism, extortion, mass murder, airline hijacking, rape, hate 
crimes, hostage taking, sexual battery, torture, and treason. Any one 
of these crimes can be facilitated using the internet. As with the 
telephone and the telegraph before it, the Internet is frequently a 
tool of criminals. Section 230, which is designed to apply a uniform 
Federal standard in all civil and criminal cases brought in either 
state or Federal forums, is wholly consistent with the prosecution of 
criminal and civil claims based on the entire range of illegal activity 
of which humankind is capable.
    It is difficult to argue that, as horrible as the promotion of 
child pornography is, it is categorically worse than mass murder, 
terrorism, and a long list of other equally egregious crimes. Nor are 
these other crimes any less worthy of congressional attention. As 
Chairman of the House Committee on Homeland Security, I saw firsthand 
how terrorists use the Internet to direct violent extremist acts. 
Neither in America nor anywhere in the world should terrorists find a 
``safe space'' to operate and disseminate their murderous propaganda of 
mass destruction. When violent extremists further their plots and grow 
their ranks by use of the internet, it stands to reason that a nation 
of laws would not wish to permit laws enacted for another purpose to be 
used as a shield for such acts. Likewise, when criminal gangs kidnap 
innocent tourists for exorbitant ransom, using threats of torture and 
murder, no law should provide them any form of immunity. When assassins 
target our president, lawmakers, or Supreme Court, no one would want to 
grant the murderers a legal advantage because they happened to use the 
Internet in the commission of their crimes.
    Yet the EARN IT bill would treat these problems categorically 
differently for legal purposes, providing one set of rules for child 
sexual abuse material and another, presumably more lenient, set of 
rules for terrorism.
    This represents a fundamental misunderstanding of how Section 230 
is intended to operate. It was designed to protect the innocent from 
being held liable for wrongs committed entirely by others--a principle 
that should not be waived in any circumstances. It was equally intended 
to ensure that those who actually commit wrongs will be subject to 
prosecution by both civil and criminal law enforcement. One need not 
rely on the legislative history or the words of the authors for this 
proposition. The language of the statute is plain enough. If a website, 
or anyone who provides what the law describes as interactive computer 
services, is complicit in the creation of unlawful content then it may 
not claim protection under Section 230.
    Section 230, as written and as interpreted by the courts, is 
thoroughly consistent with the aggressive prosecution of child sexual 
exploitation. Equally importantly, it is thoroughly consistent with the 
aggressive prosecution of all other crimes. It makes little sense to 
countenance an interpretation of Section 230 that communicates to 
judges looking at prior decisional law that henceforth, a less 
stringent rule will be applied in all but the narrow categories carved 
out of Section 230 by Congress. Each carveout for differential 
treatment will create significant new legal ambiguities and 
inexplicable horizontal disparities in both Federal and civil 
litigation. Judges faced with a new Section 230 standard for sex 
trafficking and child sex abuse cases will be hard pressed not to infer 
that cases involving other crimes must be decided using a different 
rule.
    It is notable that the most of the Nation's attorneys general have 
written to Congress endorsing a different approach--one that will 
encompass not only child sexual abuse but all criminal enforcement 
actions. Such an approach would ensure that courts do not decide to 
make some Internet crimes easier, and some crimes harder, to prosecute. 
While it would be a mistake to do this by scrapping the uniform Federal 
policy with respect to liability for Internet platforms, it is 
unquestionably correct that uniformity in the application of the 
Federal policy to all crimes is necessary to prevent unintended 
consequences such as the creation of loopholes that benefit criminals.
Conclusion
    I applaud the efforts of Senators on this subcommittee and on the 
full committee to undertake a thoughtful and dispassionate analysis of 
the several competing interests involved in keeping the Internet free 
from illegal content and conduct, while at the same time promoting and 
protecting a vibrant Internet ecosystem with the maximum level of free 
expression. As the co-author of Section 230, which has proven to be a 
foundational legal underpinning for the Internet as it has developed 
over the last quarter century, I am proud of the role that this law has 
played in empowering the millions of content creators on the internet, 
and for the protections it has effectively provided for the freedom of 
speech of millions of people.
    Our reconsideration of the scope of Section 230's protections comes 
at a time in world history when digital authoritarianism is spreading 
rapidly around the globe. As Freedom House has noted in its most recent 
annual report on the state of global Internet freedom entitled Freedom 
on the Net, ``repressive regimes, elected incumbents with authoritarian 
ambitions, and unscrupulous partisan operatives have exploited the 
unregulated spaces of social media platforms, converting them into 
instruments for political distortion and societal control.'' \34\ They 
note that while social media in other nations have at times served as a 
level playing field for civic discussion, they now more often expose 
citizens to unprecedented invasions of their fundamental freedoms, as 
governments deploy advanced tools to identify and monitor users on a 
vast scale. This abuse of social media is occurring not just in well-
known cases such as the People's Republic of China, Russia, Iran, and 
Saudi Arabia, but also in 38 of the 65 countries covered in their 
latest report.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \34\ Freedom on the Net 2019: The Crisis of Social Media, available 
at https://freedomhouse.org/report/freedom-net/2019/crisis-social-media
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    America's approach to the regulation of social media, and of speech 
on the Internet more generally, has to date followed a very different 
model, abjuring government control in favor of private ordering. This 
has led some critics to argue that private control of the vast amounts 
of information generated by users of the Internet represents a threat 
to liberty and privacy equal to or greater than would be the result of 
government control. But two factors militate against this conclusion. 
Importantly, the private websites and platforms with access to user 
data are many, and compete with one another. And they lack the powers 
of a sovereign to aggregate all available data and then to regulate the 
citizenry through its exploitation. In the hands of government, social 
media surveillance tools employing artificial intelligence can easily 
become powerful weapons with which to silence undesirable expression 
and exert social control.
    Before taking even the first baby steps away from the policy 
Congress and the president endorsed in Section 230 ``to preserve the 
vibrant and competitive free market that presently exists for the 
Internet and other interactive computer services, unfettered by Federal 
or State regulation,'' legislators should be fully aware of where this 
road could lead.
    The landscape of the Internet continues to change rapidly, and 
therefore demands continued vigilant oversight and critical scrutiny by 
lawmakers. Section 230 is the creation of Congress, and subject to its 
plenary authority to make and revise laws. It is not written in stone 
and far from sacrosanct. But it has also provided us with the benefit 
of a quarter century of practical experience, through continually 
changing and often challenging circumstances. In the main, it has 
performed well. To the extent that courts applying it have sometimes 
given us unwanted results, we can take comfort in the fact that as of 
2020 the interpretive kinks that in the past have sometimes let wrongs 
go without remedy have been for the most part worked out.
    Were I still in Congress, though I would be tempted to embellish my 
original work (like the artist who continues to add a daub here and a 
brushstroke there, with the result that the painting is never 
finished), in the current environment I would hesitate to do so. My far 
greater concern would be the risk, which I have so often seen 
materialize in the completion of legislation with which I have been 
involved, that the process of moving the bill through numerous 
committees, markups, and perhaps an ultimate conference between House 
and Senate would ultimately run away with my best intentions.
    Unlike the placid policymaking environment in which Section 230 was 
conceived and midwifed into law in 1995-96, today the cacophony that is 
the debate over social media, content moderation, free speech, and 
criminality on the Internet guarantees not only near-irreconcilable 
conflicts but also legislative attempts to somehow square the circle. 
Such deep compromises ranging from the smallest details to high-level 
issues, which will be necessary if a Republican Senate and Democratic 
House are to reach any agreement on a bill that achieves their very 
disparate aims, will likely produce legislation far different from the 
careful balancing of competing interests that this committee's 
thoughtful and dispassionate analysis is admittedly capable of 
producing in the first instance.
    In my judgment, the chance that in the end the most important 
benefits of Section 230 could be undermined, or lost entirely, is a 
gamble with the future of the Internet not worth taking. Recognizing 
that it is your own judgments on these questions that matter, and that 
those judgments await your completion of your ongoing analysis of the 
many issues involved, I stand ready to assist you in any way that I 
can.

    Senator Thune. Thank you, Mr. Cox.
    Next up is Mr. Jeff Kosseff.
    Mr. Kosseff, please proceed.

                   STATEMENT OF JEFF KOSSEFF,

         ASSISTANT PROFESSOR, CYBER SCIENCE DEPARTMENT,

                  UNITED STATES NAVAL ACADEMY

    Mr. Kosseff. Chairman Thune, Ranking Member Schatz, and 
members of the Subcommittee, thank you for providing me with 
the opportunity to testify about the history and purpose of 
Section 230.
    I'm an assistant professor in the Cyber Science Department 
in the U.S. Naval Academy. My testimony today reflects only my 
personal views and does not represent the Naval Academy, 
Department of Navy, Department of Defense, or any other party.
    This hearing is of the utmost importance, as Section 230 is 
responsible, more than any other law, for the open Internet 
that Americans know, love, and hate. I am not here today to 
advocate for or against any particular legislation. Rather, my 
goal is to help expand the public understanding of Section 230.
    As explained in detail in my written testimony, under the 
First Amendment and common law, distributors cannot be held 
liable for content created by others unless the distributors 
knew, or had reason to know, of the illegal content. A New York 
trial judge in 1995 ruled that Prodigy did not receive this 
distributor protection and, instead, was deemed a publisher 
that's liable, regardless of its state of mind. The judge's 
reasoning was that Prodigy has implemented detail user conduct 
rules and employed content moderating.
    Members of Congress passed Section 230 in 1996 in an effort 
to override this decision and encourage platforms to moderate. 
Some critics argue that platforms have not adequately moderated 
harmful content. Other critics argue that some existing 
moderation practices result in blocking certain political 
viewpoints. And both criticisms have driven a number of 
proposals to change Section 230.
    Today, I hope to set forth some principles to guide your 
evaluations of Section 230s future:
    First, not all problems on the Internet are Section 230 
problems. For instance, the First Amendment, and not Section 
230, protects hate speech. Additionally, many defamation claims 
that courts dismiss on Section 230 grounds would also, if fully 
litigated, not survive common law and First Amendment 
protections.
    Second, we do not know with certainty how platforms would 
react to a repeal or a significant contraction of Section 230, 
because the modern Internet has always existed with Section 230 
in place. One possibility is, the platforms might avoid 
moderation, fearing that, once they encounter potentially 
actionable content, they would become liable for it. There's 
also the chance that there would be fewer venues for user-
generated content.
    Third, Section 230 is designed to encourage, and not 
discourage, moderation of user content. In the debate over 
neutrality of platforms, I see a few different questions:
    First, does Section 230 currently require neutrality? As I 
explained in my written testimony, the answer to this question 
is no.
    Second, should Section 230 require neutrality? The answer 
to this question is up to you, as Congress is free to amend 
Section 230 as it sees fit; of course, within the confines of 
the First Amendment.
    If Section 230 were to attempt to impose a neutrality 
requirement, I would ask what such a requirement would look 
like, and how it would be implemented. Of course, Congress can, 
and should, determine whether the market-based system under 
Section 230 continues to meet users' expectations in 2020.
    Fourth, the Section 230 debate needs far more transparency. 
Last October, I suggested the creation of a congressionally 
chartered commission to gather facts and recommend a path 
forward. The Cyberspace Solarium Commission provides an 
excellent model for this.
    I commend the Chairman and Ranking Member for the 
thoughtful solutions that you've proposed in the PACT Act. The 
legislation addresses the need for more transparency and 
content moderation policies, and begins the process of 
identifying the most tailored and reasonable rules for 
providing that transparency. The bill also provides people with 
a mechanism to take down material that has been adjudicated to 
be defamatory or illegal under Federal criminal or civil law. 
We must ensure that a takedown provision is not abused, for 
example, via the falsification of court orders.
    As I routinely remind technology companies, Section 230 is 
not set in stone and can be repealed or significantly amended 
as easily as it was passed. Congress may determine that it is 
in the public interest to curtail some or all of Section 230s 
protections. I urge you to make any such decisions with great 
care.
    It is difficult to imagine how some of the largest 
companies in the United States could have emerged, at least in 
their current forms, without Section 230. The challenge for all 
of us is to determine how we want the Internet to look over the 
next 25 years, and what it takes to get it.
    I look forward to taking your questions.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Kosseff follows:]

Prepared Statement of Jeff Kosseff, Assistant Professor, Cyber Science 
                Department, United States Naval Academy
    Chairman Thune, Ranking Member Schatz, and Members of the 
Subcommittee, thank you for providing me with the opportunity to 
testify about the history and purpose of Section 230 of the 
Communications Decency Act of 1996.
    I am an assistant professor in the Cyber Science Department of the 
United States Naval Academy. My testimony today reflects only my 
personal views, and does not represent the Naval Academy, Department of 
Navy, Department of Defense, or any other party.
    It is difficult to overstate the importance of the subject of this 
hearing. Last year, I published a history of Section 230, titled The 
Twenty-Six Words That Created the Internet. The Internet's protocols 
and technology were developed long before 1996. But Section 230 is 
responsible, more than any other law, for the open Internet that 
Americans know, love, and hate. By shielding online platforms from 
liability for a great deal of third-party content, Section 230 has 
paved the way for Yelp, Wikipedia, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, and so 
many other online services. These have primarily based their business 
models on content created by individuals rather than corporations. 
Section 230 also has protected a wide range of companies of all sizes 
that operate websites with user comments.
    When I began writing a book about Section 230 in 2016, few people 
outside of technology law and policy circles knew much about what the 
law does and why Congress passed it in 1996. Much has changed in those 
four years, as large platforms are under unprecedented scrutiny for 
their handling of user-generated content. Suddenly, Section 230 has 
moved from obscure legal discussions to the headlines of major media 
organizations. Many are calling for you to repeal or amend Section 230. 
Indeed, there are many legislative proposals, including a thoughtful 
one from the Chairman and Ranking Member of this subcommittee.
    I am not here today to advocate for or against any particular 
legislation. Rather, my goal is to help expand the public understanding 
of Section 230, first by providing an overview of its history and 
purpose, and then by suggesting principles that could guide Congress as 
it considers Section 230s future.
I. The History of Section 230
    To understand why we have Section 230 and what it does, we need to 
look at how platform liability worked before it was passed. This 
requires an examination of the liability standards for bookstores and 
other distributors of content produced by third parties.
    The foundations for distributor liability standards come from Smith 
v. California,\1\ a 1959 Supreme Court opinion. In that case, the Court 
reversed the conviction of a Los Angeles bookstore owner whose store 
sold an obscene book. The ordinance under which he was convicted 
imposed criminal liability on bookstore operators regardless of their 
scienter or state of mind; in other words, the ordinance was one of 
strict liability on any distributor of obscene content, regardless of 
their intention or even awareness. Writing for the majority, Justice 
Brennan recognized that obscenity is not protected by the First 
Amendment, but he concluded that imposing strict liability on 
booksellers nonetheless did violate the First Amendment because such a 
rule would chill non-obscene speech.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ Smith v. California, 361 U.S. 147 (1959).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    ``By dispensing with any requirement of knowledge of the contents 
of the book on the part of the seller, the ordinance tends to impose a 
severe limitation on the public's access to constitutionally protected 
matter,'' Justice Brennan wrote. ``For if the bookseller is criminally 
liable without knowledge of the contents, and the ordinance fulfills 
its purpose, he will tend to restrict the books he sells to those he 
has inspected; and thus the State will have imposed a restriction upon 
the distribution of constitutionally protected as well as obscene 
literature.'' \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \2\ Id. at 153.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The Court in Smith refrained from articulating the precise mental 
state necessary to impose liability on distributors of third-party 
content, only saying that strict liability is unacceptable.\3\ The 
Supreme Court would provide a bit more guidance. For instance, in 1968, 
the Court upheld a New York law that imposed criminal liability on a 
newsstand that sold pornographic magazines to minors.\4\ The statute 
applied to stores that have ``general knowledge of, or reason to know, 
or a belief or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or 
inquiry'' of both the character and content of material that is 
``reasonably susceptible of examination by the defendant'' as well as 
the minor's age.\5\ Writing for the majority, Brennan concluded that 
this level of awareness satisfies the concerns that he articulated in 
Smith, though he again refrained from setting a precise minimum 
standard for all distributor cases.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \3\ Id. at 154-55.
    \4\ Ginsberg v. New York, 390 U.S. 629 (1968).
    \5\ Id. at 646.
    \6\ Id. at 644-45.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Following Smith v. California--but prior to the passage of Section 
230--lower courts generally adopted a rule, rooted in the common law 
and the First Amendment, that distributors cannot be liable for content 
created by others unless the distributors knew or had reason to know of 
the illegal content. This rule applies not only to criminal obscenity 
cases, but also to civil claims such as defamation.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \7\ See, e.g., Dworkin v. Hustler Magazine, 611 F. Supp. 781 (D. 
Wyo. 1985); Osmond v. Ewap, 153 Cal. App. 3d 842 (Cal. Ct. App. 1984).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    This common law rule was first applied to an online service in 
1991, in a defamation action against CompuServe, one of the earliest 
national online dial-up services. The suit arose from statements in an 
online newsletter that CompuServe distributed. The district court 
dismissed the lawsuit, concluding that CompuServe was ``in essence an 
electronic, for-profit library that carries a vast number of 
publications and collects usage and membership fees from its 
subscribers in return for access to the publications.'' \8\ In other 
words, CompuServe was a distributor, and therefore deserved the same 
liability standards to which newsstands were held.\9\ Because the 
plaintiff had not demonstrated that it knew or had reason to know of 
the alleged libel in the newsletter, the court dismissed the case.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \8\ Cubby v. CompuServe, 776 F. Supp. 135, 140 (S.D.N.Y. 1991).
    \9\ Id. Crucially, the court acknowledged that even a distributor 
such as CompuServe could have some control over the content that it 
distributed. See id. (``While CompuServe may decline to carry a given 
publication altogether, in reality, once it does decide to carry a 
publication, it will have little or no editorial control over that 
publication's contents. This is especially so when CompuServe carries 
the publication as part of a forum that is managed by a company 
unrelated to CompuServe.'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    CompuServe's main competitor at the time was Prodigy, which sought 
to distinguish itself from CompuServe by offering more family-friendly 
services. Prodigy employed contract moderators and implemented detailed 
user conduct rules. When Prodigy was sued due to comments made on a 
Prodigy financial bulletin board, the company attempted to claim the 
same distributor liability standard to which CompuServe was held. In 
May 1995, a New York state trial court judge rejected Prodigy's 
attempt, finding that Prodigy is not a distributor, but rather a 
publisher that is liable regardless of whether it knew or had reason to 
know of the allegedly defamatory content. Even though, by 1995, Prodigy 
had loosened its user content policies, the Court focused on the fact 
that Prodigy had at one point exercised substantial control over user 
content. ``It is Prodigy's own policies, technology and staffing 
decisions which have altered the scenario and mandated the finding that 
it is a publisher,'' the judge wrote. ``Prodigy's conscious choice, to 
gain the benefits of editorial control, has opened it up to a greater 
liability than CompuServe and other computer networks that make no such 
choice.'' \10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \10\ Stratton Oakmont v. Prodigy Service Co., 23 Media L. Rep. 1794 
(N.Y. Sup. Ct. May 24, 1995).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The Stratton Oakmont v. Prodigy case received significant media 
attention. Although it did not create binding precedent, it strongly 
suggested that online services could reduce their exposure to liability 
by taking a hands-off approach to user content. If, like Prodigy, a 
platform exercised significant control over user content, a court might 
conclude that it does not receive the same ``distributor'' liability 
standards as a bookstore or newsstand. I believe the ruling was flawed 
because it ignored the fact that even the more hands-off CompuServe 
could choose not to carry a publication in its electronic version of a 
newsstand. And even if a platform received the liability standard of a 
``distributor,'' it still could face liability if it knew of, or had 
reason to know of, illegal content, creating another disincentive to 
moderation.
    When Reps. Chris Cox and Ron Wyden learned about the Prodigy case, 
they agreed that it made little sense. Why subject an online service to 
more liability simply because it took steps to moderate objectionable 
content? This disincentive was particularly concerning as schools and 
homes increasingly connected computers to the Internet. If the legal 
system discouraged online services from moderation, the result could be 
the exposure of children to pornography and other objectionable 
material. A bill in the Senate, the Communications Decency Act of 1995, 
sought to address this problem by imposing criminal liability for the 
transmission of indecent content. The Senate attached this decency 
proposal to its massive overhaul of U.S. telecommunications law.
    Cox and Wyden believed that the online services--which are 
accountable to their users--are better positioned than the government 
to set user content policies. They saw the potential for the Internet 
to be an engine for job growth. They did not want to stifle this 
burgeoning new technology with regulation and litigation. Nor did they 
want to impose a duty of pre-screening user content before it was 
posted.
    On June 30, 1995, Cox and Wyden introduced the Internet Freedom and 
Family Empowerment Act, most of which would later become Section 230. 
To address the prospect of government regulation, the bill initially 
stated that the Federal Communications Commission does not have 
authority ``with respect to economic or content regulation of the 
Internet or other interactive computer services.'' \11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \11\ This provision would not remain in Section 230 as signed into 
law.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The centerpiece of the bill, however, focused on the liability of 
online platforms for user content, and the need to eliminate any 
disincentive to moderation. The provision that contains what I believe 
are the 26 words that created the Internet states: ``No provider or 
user of an interactive computer service shall be treated as the 
publisher or speaker of any information provided by another information 
content provider.'' \12\ The bill also prevents interactive computer 
service providers and users from being liable for ``any action 
voluntarily taken in good faith to restrict access to or availability 
of material that the provider or user considers to be obscene, lewd, 
lascivious, filthy, excessively violent, harassing, or otherwise 
objectionable, whether or not such material is constitutionally 
protected'' \13\ or providing the technical means to restrict 
access.\14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \12\ 47 U.S.C. Sec. 230(c)(1). As initially introduced, this 
provision actually contained 25 words because it stated: ``No provider 
or user of interactive computer services shall be treated as the 
publisher or speaker of any information provided by an information 
content provider.''
    \13\ 47 U.S.C. Sec. 230(c)(2)(A).
    \14\ 47 U.S.C. Sec. 230(c)(2)(B).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Cox and Wyden included exceptions for the enforcement of Federal 
criminal law,\15\ intellectual property law,\16\ and Federal and state 
electronic communications privacy laws.\17\ The bill was partly based 
on a theory of user empowerment: the belief that users, with tools 
provided by their platforms, should determine what content should be 
available to them and their children.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \15\ 47 U.S.C. Sec. 230(e)(1).
    \16\ 47 U.S.C. Sec. 230(e)(2).
    \17\ 47 U.S.C. Sec. 230(e)(4).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    To clarify their intentions, Cox and Wyden included findings at the 
start of their bill. Among their findings: ``These services offer users 
a great degree of control over the information that they receive, as 
well as the potential for even greater control in the future as 
technology develops.'' \18\ Cox and Wyden also wrote that the 
``Internet and other interactive computer services offer a forum for a 
true diversity of political discourse, unique opportunities for 
cultural development, and myriad avenues for intellectual activity.'' 
\19\ The Internet has ``flourished, to the benefit of all Americans'' 
they wrote, ``with a minimum of government regulation.'' \20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \18\ 47 U.S.C. Sec. 230(a)(2).
    \19\ 47 U.S.C. Sec. 230(a)(3).
    \20\ 47 U.S.C. Sec. 230(a)(4).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    They also included statements of policy, including ``to promote the 
continued development of the Internet and other interactive computer 
services and other interactive media'' \21\ and ``to encourage the 
development of technologies which maximize user control over what 
information is received by individuals, families, and schools who use 
the Internet and other interactive computer services.'' \22\ They also 
wrote that it is U.S. policy ``to preserve the vibrant and competitive 
free market that presently exists for the Internet and other 
interactive computer services, unfettered by Federal or State 
regulation.'' \23\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \21\ 47 U.S.C. Sec. 230(b)(1).
    \22\ 47 U.S.C. Sec. 230(b)(3).
    \23\ 47 U.S.C. Sec. 230(b)(2).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    On Aug. 4, 1995, the House debated whether to add the Cox-Wyden 
proposal to its version of what would become the 1996 
telecommunications overhaul. The House members almost uniformly 
welcomed the proposal as an alternative to the Senate's indecency 
proposal, which many viewed as unconstitutional. ``Really it is like 
saying that the mailman is going to be liable when he delivers a plain 
brown envelope for what is inside it,'' Rep. Zoe Lofgren said of the 
Senate proposal. ``It will not work.'' \24\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \24\ 141 Cong. Rec. H8471 (1995).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Rep. Robert Goodlatte spoke of the need to fix the perverse 
incentive created by the Prodigy opinion. ``The Cox-Wyden amendment 
removes the liability of providers such as Prodigy who currently make a 
good faith effort to edit the smut from their systems,'' Goodlatte 
said. ``It also encourages the online services industry to develop new 
technology, such as blocking software, to empower parents to monitor 
and control the information their kids can access.'' \25\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \25\ 141 Cong. Rec. H8471-72 (1995).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Cox spoke about the need to avoid Federal regulation of the 
Internet. The bill, he said, ``will establish as the policy of the 
United States that we do not wish to have content regulation by the 
Federal Government of what is on the Internet, that we do not wish to 
have a Federal Computer Commission with an army of bureaucrats 
regulating the Internet because frankly the Internet has grown up to be 
what it is without that kind of help from the Government.'' \26\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \26\ 141 Cong. Rec. H8470 (1995).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The House voted 420-4 to attach Cox and Wyden's amendment to its 
version of the Telecommunications Act. As a compromise, the conference 
committee included both the Senate's Communications Decency Act and the 
House's amendment in the same Title of the telecommunications law. 
Hence, the Cox-Wyden provision became known as ``Section 230 of the 
Communications Decency Act,'' even though it had not been introduced 
under with that title. Section 230 appeared largely as Cox and Wyden 
proposed it, though it no longer contained the provision that banned 
FCC regulation of Internet content. The final version also added an 
explicit statement that ``[n]o cause of action may be brought and no 
liability may be imposed under any State or local law that is 
inconsistent with this section.'' \27\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \27\ 47 U.S.C. Sec. 230(e)(3).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    From the relatively sparse legislative history, it is clear that 
Section 230s drafters had two primary goals. First, they wanted to 
ensure that the nascent commercial Internet was unburdened from 
regulation and litigation. Second, they wanted to encourage online 
providers to moderate as they (and their users) saw fit. In the short 
discussion of Section 230 in the conference report for the 
Telecommunications Act, the conferees wrote that they intended to 
overrule the Stratton Oakmont v. Prodigy decision, and that ``such 
decisions create serious obstacles to the important Federal policy of 
empowering parents to determine the content of communications their 
children receive through interactive computer services.'' \28\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \28\ H. Rep. 104-458 at 194.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    On the day that President Clinton signed the Telecommunications Act 
into law, civil liberties groups challenged the Senate's indecency 
provisions, and the next year the Supreme Court would strike them down 
as unconstitutional.\29\ The Supreme Court's ruling did not affect 
Section 230. In fact, the civil liberties groups that challenged the 
Communications Decency Act took care to not include Section 230 in 
their litigation, recognizing the need to preserve Section 230.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \29\ Reno v. American Civil Liberties Union, 521 U.S. 844 (1997).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Section 230 received little attention in the months after it was 
passed. This was in part because it was unclear how broadly courts 
would interpret the 26 words. It was possible to read Section 230 as 
merely conferring distributor liability standards to all interactive 
computer service providers; in other words, a platform still could be 
liable if it knew or had reason to know of the illegal user content. A 
second, broader reading, would bar the platform from having any 
liability for content provided entirely by third parties, unless an 
exception applied.
    This uncertainty ended on Nov. 12, 1997, when the United States 
Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit adopted the latter, broad 
reading of Section 230 in Zeran v. America Online. Distributor 
liability, Judge J. Harvie Wilkinson wrote, ``is merely a subset, or a 
species, of publisher liability.\30\ Thus, Wilkinson concluded, when 
Section 230 states that an interactive computer service provider shall 
not be ``treated as the publisher or speaker'' of information provided 
by a third party, the statute also bars distributor liability. 
``Section 230 was enacted, in part, to maintain the robust nature of 
Internet communication and, accordingly, to keep government 
interference in the medium to a minimum,'' Judge Wilkinson wrote.\31\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \30\ Zeran v. America Online, 129 F.3d 327, 332 (4th Cir. 1997).
    \31\ Id. at 330.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Wilkinson recognized that subjecting an online service such as 
America Online to notice-based liability likely would cause these 
services to remove user content upon notice, even if the content was 
not defamatory. ``Each notification would require a careful yet rapid 
investigation of the circumstances surrounding the posted information, 
a legal judgment concerning the information's defamatory character, and 
an on-the-spot editorial decision whether to risk liability by allowing 
the continued publication of that information,'' he wrote. ``Although 
this might be feasible for the traditional print publisher, the sheer 
number of postings on interactive computer services would create an 
impossible burden in the Internet context.'' \32\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \32\ Id. at 333.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Because Judge Wilkinson was the first Federal appellate judge to 
interpret Section 230, judges nationwide adopted his ruling in Zeran v. 
America Online, and the broad reading of Section 230 became the law of 
the land. Cox and Wyden--the authors of Section 230--told me as I was 
researching my book that they agreed with Wilkinson's interpretation. 
But it is possible to see how another judge might have concluded that 
Section 230s scope if more limited.
    The Zeran reading of Section 230 eliminates the Stratton Oakmont v. 
Prodigy problem by preventing platforms from becoming liable for user 
content they are unaware of simply because they have moderated some 
other content. But it goes much further than that; it also allows 
platforms to decide whether to keep up or take down content that they 
are aware of without facing potential liability for that content. And 
that is how Section 230 has created the legal framework for the 
Internet that we know today.
    Imagine how a social media site might behave had Judge Wilkinson 
determined that Section 230 only means that all platforms be held to a 
distributor liability standard. The site could face liability if it 
knew or had reason to know of defamatory or otherwise actionable user 
content. Such a liability regime might discourage the social media site 
from actively moderating user content, as it might face liability for 
content that it learned about but failed to remove. A social media site 
with millions or billions of users is in no position to investigate 
every user post and determine whether it is defamatory or otherwise 
illegal. Section 230, as Judge Wilkinson interpreted it, removes that 
disincentive to moderation.
    Thanks to Judge Wilkinson's interpretation, Section 230 has 
protected a wide range of platforms from many different types of 
claims. As I detail in The Twenty-Six Words That Created the Internet, 
this sweeping protection has been vital for consumer review sites,\33\ 
Wikipedia,\34\ social media,\35\ search engines,\36\ and countless 
other sites that have built their business models around user-generated 
content.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \33\ Kimzey v. Yelp! Inc., 836 F. 3d 1263 (9th Cir. 2016)
    \34\ Bauer v. Glatzer, Docket No. L-1169-07 (Superior Court of 
N.J., Monmouth County, 2008)
    \35\ Doe v. MySpace, 528 F.3d 413 (5th Cir. 2008).
    \36\ Fakhrian v. Google, No. B260705 (Cal. Ct. App. April 25, 2016)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Yet Section 230 also has shielded platforms in some cases in which 
the plaintiffs have suffered serious harms. Among the lawsuits in which 
courts held that Section 230 applies is one that involved a dating app 
that was used to impersonate a man. The advertisements, posted by his 
ex-boyfriend, claimed that the man wanted to engage in rape fantasies 
or role play. This caused about 1,100 men to respond to the ads, 
receiving the man's home and workplace locations via the app's 
geolocation function. Many men visited his home and work, demanding sex 
and drugs. The man said he contacted the app about 100 times, and only 
received an automated response.\37\ He sued the app under a number of 
theories of liability, including negligence, infliction of emotional 
distress, products liability, and negligent design, but the district 
court dismissed the claims on Section 230 grounds, and the Second 
Circuit affirmed the dismissal.\38\ The district court also refused to 
extend an earlier state court temporary restraining order that required 
the app to ``immediately disable'' profiles that impersonated the 
plaintiff. Section 230 has protected a gossip website that encourages 
users to submit ``the dirt'' and selects which submissions to post and 
highlight.\39\ And it has protected social media platforms used by 
terrorists, even when the platform's algorithms helped make that user 
content visible.\40\ As long as the website operator has not taken part 
in the creation of the user content and an exception does not apply, 
Section 230 will protect the website from liability arising from the 
display and moderation of content created by others. Section 230 does 
not block a plaintiff from suing the person who created the harmful 
content, but there are a number of reasons why that might not be 
practical, including the inability to track down the poster and fear of 
retaliation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \37\ Herrick v. Grindr, 306 F. Supp. 3d 579, 585 (S.D.N.Y. 2018).
    \38\ Herrick v. Grindr, No. 18-396 (2d Cir. Mar. 27, 2019) (not 
precedential).
    \39\ Jones v. Dirty World Entertainment Recordings, 755 F.3d 398 
(6th Cir. 2014).
    \40\ Force v. Facebook, 934 F.3d 53 (2d Cir. 2019).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    In short, Section 230 has fostered an Internet in the United States 
that faces less regulatory and litigation burden than in other 
countries, including other western democracies. This open Internet has 
created many social benefits, but others have suffered real and serious 
harms. For a broad perspective about the benefits and costs of the 
Internet as governed by Section 230, I encourage you to read Hate 
Crimes in Cyberspace by Danielle Citron, The Cult of the Constitution 
by Mary Anne Franks, The Splinters of Our Discontent by Mike Godwin, 
and Nobody's Victim by Carrie Goldberg.
II. Principles for Evaluating the Future of Section 230
    Over the past year, Section 230 has been in the news more than any 
other time in its nearly 25-year history. Often, the news is not 
positive. Some critics argue that platforms have not adequately 
moderated harmful content and have failed to achieve Congress's goal of 
establishing content moderation systems that meet the needs of their 
users. Other critics argue that some existing moderation policies and 
procedures result in blocking certain political viewpoints.
    Both criticisms have driven a number of proposals to change Section 
230. I am not here today to endorse or propose any particular change to 
Section 230. Rather, I hope to set forth some principles to guide your 
evaluation of Section 230s future. I derive these principles from my 
research into Section 230s history, and the impacts of courts' 
interpretation of Section 230 over nearly a quarter century.
A. Not All Problems on the Internet Are Section 230 Problems
    I recognize that this principle may sound odd coming from a 
professor who asserts that Section 230 created the Internet. I maintain 
that Section 230 provided the legal framework that allowed platforms to 
structure their business models around user-generated content. But that 
does not mean that every flaw in the current system is attributable to 
Section 230. There is a lot to love about the Internet, but there also 
is a lot not to love about the Internet. Some content is vile. Some 
ruins lives. Some does lasting damage to society and our institutions. 
But before placing all of the blame for this content on Section 230, it 
is important to first examine whether a cause of action exists for that 
harm. If a cause of action does not exist, then there is nothing for 
Section 230 to block.
    For instance, a big headline on the cover of the New York Times 
business section last August proclaimed: ``Why Hate Speech on the 
Internet is a Never-Ending Problem.'' Below the headline were the key 
26 words from Section 230, followed by: ``Because this law shields 
it.'' The Times later appended the following dramatic correction to the 
story: ``An earlier version of this article incorrectly described the 
law that protects hate speech on the internet. The First Amendment, not 
Section 230 of the Communications Decency Act, protects it.'' Despite 
the correction, later that month, a Federal judge cited this article 
while describing the debate over ``Section 230s grant of immunity for 
speech-based harms such as hate speech or libel.'' \41\ To be sure, 
online hate speech is a serious problem, but the reality is that the 
First Amendment protects hate speech, regardless of Section 230. Of 
course, the Supreme Court's First Amendment jurisprudence could evolve 
to treat hate speech differently--and some believe it should. And even 
now, if that hate speech also is illegal for some other reason (for 
example, because it is a true threat or defamatory), then it could fall 
outside the scope of First Amendment protection. But hate speech, 
standing alone, is constitutionally protected. Changing Section 230 
would not change platforms' legal obligations in this area.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \41\ Papataros v. Amazon.com, Civ. No. 17-9836 (D. N.J. Aug. 26, 
2019).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Many defamation claims that courts dismiss on Section 230 grounds 
would also, if fully litigated, not survive common law and First 
Amendment protections. These include the requirement for falsity, the 
opinion privilege, and the actual malice bar for public officials and 
figures. Because Section 230 provides strong procedural protections, 
defamation lawsuits against platforms often are decided in the early 
stages, eliminating the need for the parties to engage in extensive 
discovery and for courts to decide fact-intensive questions about 
defamation law. Additionally, as seen in the 1950s bookseller cases, 
the First Amendment and common law provide some protection to 
distributors of content created by others. As I describe in the next 
subsection, there is uncertainty as to how extensive that protection 
is.
    In addition to hate speech concerns, large companies--including big 
technology platforms--have been rightly criticized for their privacy 
and data security practices. These are serious problems that I hope 
Congress will address with comprehensive and effective laws that set 
tough national standards for privacy and cybersecurity. Section 230, 
however, is not at the root of these problems. Section 230 only 
protects platforms from liability for third-party content; it does not 
affect their liability after a data breach or generally shield their 
data collection practices.
    Nor does Section 230 have any link to copyright infringement. From 
the beginning, Section 230 has had an exception for intellectual 
property law. Platforms and content creators have long been engaged in 
a spirited debate over the notice-and-takedown system established by an 
entirely different law, the Digital Millennium Copyright Act. 
Unfortunately, recent media reports have conflated Section 230 and the 
DMCA. Likewise, Section 230 always has had an exception for the 
enforcement of Federal criminal law, so user content that constitutes a 
Federal crime is not covered by the statute's protections.
B. We Don't Know How Platforms Would React to a Repeal or Significant 
        Contraction of Section 230
    Although there are not any legislative proposals to repeal Section 
230, repeal has been publicly suggested in the media, and it is 
important to examine what the Internet might look like without Section 
230. Moreover, eliminating Section 230 protections for a particular 
type of content might have a similar impact on some platforms.
    Because Section 230 has been on the books since 1996, it is 
difficult to know with certainty what the Internet would look like 
without it. This uncertainty stems from the lack of caselaw that 
extrapolates common law liability standards to modern online platforms. 
We can only look at cases involving bookstores, and the few non-binding 
opinions involving Prodigy and CompuServe that were decided before 
Section 230s passage.
    If courts were to adopt the Stratton Oakmont v. Prodigy line of 
thinking, platforms would fear being dubbed ``publishers,'' who are 
subject to the same liability for user content as the authors, rather 
than ``distributors,'' who are liable only if they knew or had reason 
to know of the illegal content. I believe that the judge in this case 
got the law wrong, drawing an artificial line between a publisher that 
exercises ``editorial control'' and distributor, when all distributors 
exercise some degree of editorial control (for instance, a bookstore 
could refuse to sell a certain book). Still, there is no guarantee that 
courts would disagree with the Stratton Oakmont decision. If it were 
widely adopted, this reasoning likely would discourage platforms from 
engaging in any moderation, lest they be dubbed common-law 
``publishers.''
    If courts were to reject the Stratton Oakmont v. Prodigy holding 
(as I hope they would), online platforms could face liability if they 
knew or had reason to know of the illegal content. This might result in 
a system in which anyone could complain to a platform about user 
content, regardless of the merit of their complaints, at which point a 
platform that did not take down the content would risk being forced to 
defend it in court. Platforms also might avoid moderation, fearing that 
once they encounter potentially defamatory or otherwise actionable 
content, they would become liable for it. Complicating matters, it is 
unclear when a platform would have a ``reason to know'' of illegal 
content, as there is very little caselaw that articulates when a 
distributor has ``reason to know.'' For instance, this might expose a 
platform to liability if it generally knew that users posted defamatory 
material, but had not seen the particular post in question.
    In the landmark Zeran case, Judge Wilkinson warned that it was 
``impossible'' to expect platforms to screen user content. ``Faced with 
potential liability for each message republished by their services, 
interactive computer service providers might choose to severely 
restrict the number and type of messages posted,'' he wrote. ``Congress 
considered the weight of the speech interests implicated and chose to 
immunize service providers to avoid any such restrictive effect.'' \42\ 
Indeed, it is conceivable that some platforms might reduce or entirely 
eliminate user content in a world without Section 230s protections.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \42\ Zeran v. America Online, 129 F.3d 327, 331 (4th Cir. 1997).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    A change to Section 230--even short of full repeal--may have 
significant impacts on platforms' operations. For instance, when 
Congress amended Section 230 in 2018 to create an exception for certain 
civil actions and state criminal cases involving sex trafficking, 
Craigslist removed the personals section it had hosted for years. ``Any 
tool or service can be misused,'' Craigslist wrote. ``We can't take 
such risk without jeopardizing all our other services, so we have 
regretfully taken craigslist personals offline.''
C. Section 230 is Designed to Encourage--Not Discourage--Moderation of 
        User 
        Content
    In my decade writing about Section 230 and practicing Internet law, 
I have encountered far too many lawyers who advise website operators 
that if they moderate user content, they will lose their Section 230 
protections. I fear that this has caused websites to take a hands-off 
approach to user content that they otherwise would have blocked.
    This advice is simply incorrect. Section 230s protections do not 
disappear merely because a platform has engaged in content moderation. 
As Section 230s legislative history makes clear, one of the main 
purposes of Section 230 was to encourage online service providers to 
moderate. Indeed, the title of the most important section of the 
statute is ``Protection for `Good Samaritan' Blocking and Screening of 
Offensive Material.''
    To be sure, Section 230 does not require moderation. Rather, the 
law leaves it up to the providers to determine what moderation--and 
moderation tools--to provide to their users. Section 230 is very much a 
market-based law, based on the assumption that user demands will 
dictate platforms' moderation approaches.
    Of course, Congress can and should determine whether the market-
based system continues to meet users' expectations in 2020, when a 
handful of platforms have market capitalizations that are greater than 
those of automakers. We are in a very different world than 1996, when 
40 million people worldwide had Internet access, and being suspended 
from Prodigy was unlikely to have significant consequences to one's 
livelihood. Suspension from a large social media platform in 2020, on 
the other hand, has a much greater impact.
    In the debate over ``neutrality'' of platforms, I see a few 
different questions. First: Does Section 230 currently require 
neutrality? Second: Should Section 230 require neutrality?
    The answer to the first question, as explained above, is ``no.'' 
The answer to the second question is up to you, as Congress is free to 
amend Section 230 as it sees fit. If Congress were to attempt to impose 
a neutrality requirement, I would ask what such a requirement would 
look like, and how it would be implemented. Moderation often requires 
difficult judgments about content being transmitted at a furious pace. 
Could a platform block any content while still remaining ``neutral?'' 
Would a ``neutral'' Internet full of legal pornography, threats, 
bullying, or encouragement of anorexia be an improvement? Even if this 
neutrality requirement were limited to political speech, some political 
debates can border on hate speech. If a platform were to moderate a 
political discussion for violating its hate speech policies, would that 
violate a neutrality requirement? These questions are tough to answer 
in the abstract, and even more difficult when presented with the 
torrent of choices that platforms must make every minute.
D. The Section 230 Debate Needs More Transparency
    I am thrilled to see Section 230 suddenly receiving much-deserved 
attention, as it is one of the most important technology-related laws 
in the United States. Unfortunately, some of this attention has lacked 
precision and accuracy. This is due to a number of problems, including 
the nuances of Internet liability law and what I imagine is a 
substantial amount of lobbying efforts on all sides.
    But the debate also is muddled because the general public has 
little insight into the possibilities--and challenges--of content 
moderation at scale. Until recently, many large tech companies were not 
terribly transparent about their policies and practices, though the 
recent Section 230 debates have had the positive impact of shining a 
bit of sunlight on content moderation. We need far more. Platforms 
should continue to provide more information about how and why they 
moderate content, and the possibilities and limits of human-based and 
automated moderation. If platforms are not transparent, Congress should 
consider whether to require or provide incentives for better 
transparency.
    Before we can develop new policies regarding intermediary liability 
and content moderation, we need a more robust factual record. Section 
230 is too important to overhaul in the dark. Last October, I suggested 
the creation of a congressionally chartered commission to gather facts 
and recommend a path forward.\43\ The commission would have a wide 
range of stakeholders, including civil liberties groups, victims' 
advocates, law enforcement, and technology companies and their counsel. 
The Cyberspace Solarium Commission provides a good model for a 
bipartisan group of experts who gather facts and develop well-reasoned 
proposals.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \43\ Jeff Kosseff, Understand the Internet's Most Important Law 
Before Changing It, Regulatory Review (Oct. 10, 2019).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    A commission also could help to better identify the goals of 
Section 230 reform and sort through the many current calls for reform, 
some of which conflict with one another. The criticisms of platforms 
vary widely, with some arguing that platforms do not moderate enough, 
and others arguing that they moderate too much, at least for certain 
political viewpoints. It is difficult to reconcile these criticisms, 
let alone modify Section 230 in a manner that satisfies of them. Before 
we identify a solution, we must agree on a problem.
                                 * * *
    I commend the Chairman and Ranking Member for the thoughtful 
solutions that you propose in the Platform Accountability and Consumer 
Transparency Act. The legislation addresses the need for more 
transparency in content moderation policies and procedures, and begins 
the process of identifying the most tailored and reasonable rules for 
providing that transparency. The bill also provides people with a 
mechanism to take down material that has been adjudicated to be 
defamatory or illegal under Federal criminal or civil law. In my 
experience, plaintiffs who are the victims of the most harmful 
defamation campaigns are most interested in having the material removed 
rather than recovering damages, and this legislation provides them with 
an avenue. We must ensure that a take-down provision is not abused--for 
example, via the falsification of court orders--but it also is 
important to allow for the removal of material that is adjudicated to 
be illegal.
    As I routinely remind technology companies, Section 230 is not set 
in stone, and can be repealed or significantly amended as easily as it 
was passed. Congress may determine that it is in the public interest to 
curtail some or all of Section 230s protections. I urge you to make any 
such decisions with great care.
    You likely will hear from many sides of the Section 230 debate 
about the consequences of your action or inaction. They likely will 
inform you of these consequences with great certainty. As I have 
outlined today, there are many reasons to be uncertain about the 
precise impacts of changes to Section 230. The best that we can do is 
identify the problems, gather as much information as possible, and 
address these problems in a focused and tailored manner.
    Our online ecosystem relies on these 26 words. As I write in my 
book, our modern Internet is a house that is ``built on the foundation 
of Section 230.'' It is difficult to imagine how some of Silicon 
Valley's largest companies could have emerged--at least in their 
current forms--without Section 230. The challenge for all of us is to 
determine how we want the Internet to look over the next 25 years and 
what it takes to get it.

    Senator Thune. Thank you, Mr. Kosseff.
    Next up is Ms. Elizabeth Banker.
    Please proceed.

                STATEMENT OF ELIZABETH BANKER, 
          DEPUTY GENERAL COUNSEL, INTERNET ASSOCIATION

    Ms. Banker. Chairman Thune, Ranking Member Schatz, and 
members of the Subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to 
testify at this important hearing.
    My name is Elizabeth Banker, and I'm Internet Association's 
Deputy General Counsel.
    IA is grateful for the opportunity to appear before the 
Subcommittee to discuss Section 230, the foundational law that 
empowers the modern Internet. We appreciate the Subcommittee's 
thoughtful approach to understanding the history and purpose of 
Section 230.
    IA also appreciates the focus on the twin goals of 
promoting transparency and accountability in content moderation 
that are at the heart of the PACT Act.
    While we have feedback on the bill, it demonstrates that 
not all problems related to online content can, or must, be 
solved by amending Section 230. IA hopes to continue our work 
with the authors to ensure that the bill can achieve its 
objectives without hindering innovation and flexibility in 
content moderation.
    Section 230 empowers companies to offer innovative services 
while simultaneously setting and enforcing policies for using 
those services. The law carefully balances free expression and 
protecting consumers in a way that serves their users and their 
service, and also allowing them to respond to an ever-changing 
set of challenges. Without Section 230, many individuals and 
organizations would not be able to create spaces for 
discussion, because of potential liability for every post.
    Section 230 removes disincentives for companies to set and 
enforce rules for the vast amount of content disseminated on 
their platforms. As panelists have explained, Section 230 
resolves what is called the ``moderator's dilemma,'' allowing 
Internet companies to adopt and enforce community standards 
without the fear that it will expose them to unnecessary and 
often baseless lawsuits. IA members do exactly that, they set 
and enforce rules for their services, working continually to 
make them safer. From child sexual abuse material to terrorist 
content, from self-harm to targeted harassment, IA members have 
long track records of resource-intensive efforts to combat 
objectionable online content and providing tools to allow their 
users to control their online experiences.
    Our member companies are constantly learning and adapting 
their approaches to strike the appropriate balance between 
allowing expression and protecting users. It's not easy, and 
such action is frequently subject to criticism from all sides, 
concerned either that too much or too little has been done.
    Spam is a helpful example of how Section 230 works. 
Providers must continually adjust their enforcement efforts in 
realtime as spammers adopt new techniques designed to evade 
detection. The scale of these efforts is staggering. Facebook 
took action against 1.9 billion pieces of spam in a 3-month 
period. In multiple cases, Section 230 has shielded providers 
from lawsuits from spammers who sued over removing their spam 
material. And the courts have applied Section 230 and allowed 
the valuable work that the companies do to continue.
    To better understand how the law works more broadly, IA 
reviewed over 500 decisions involving Section 230. While the 
national policy debate is focused on a few extreme examples 
that break into national media or specific content moderation 
decisions, the importance of Section 230 is best demonstrated 
by the lesser-known cases that escape the headlines. These 
cases show that the law continues to perform as Congress 
intended, quietly protecting discussion boards operated by 
soccer parents, nurses, police associations, and labor union 
members, protecting them from lawsuits.
    When applied by courts, Section 230 is far from a blanket 
immunity. Only 42 percent of the decisions we reviewed relied 
primarily on Section 230. Over a quarter of the decisions 
involved claims that were dismissed for case defects that were 
separate and apart from Section 230. Courts rejected Section 
230 defenses when they did not apply. Further, courts looked 
carefully at the provider's role in creating content, a 
determining factor on whether or not Section 230 applies, 
frequently requiring further investigation before making a 
decision. Ultimately, our study supports the call for a 
thorough and unbiased review of 230 to determine what, if any, 
changes are necessary before legislating.
    Great care should be taken when considering possible 
changes to Section 230 or legislating on content moderation, 
given the ever-evolving nature of Internet technology and the 
complexity of law surrounding online speech.
    Thank you. I look forward to your questions.
    [The prepared statement of Ms. Banker follows:]

    Prepared Statement of Elizabeth Banker, Deputy General Counsel, 
                          Internet Association
    Chairman Thune, Ranking Member Schatz, and members of the 
Subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to testify at this important 
hearing today. My name is Elizabeth Banker, and I am Deputy General 
Counsel of Internet Association.
    Internet Association is grateful for the opportunity to appear 
before this Subcommittee to discuss Section 230--the foundational law 
that has fostered the development and growth of the variety of online 
services that consumers consider the best of the internet. We 
appreciate the Subcommittee's thoughtful approach to understanding the 
history and purpose of Section 230, and I hope my testimony will assist 
in your efforts.
    IA is the only trade association that exclusively represents 
leading global Internet companies on matters of public policy. IA's 
mission is to foster innovation, promote economic growth, and empower 
people through the free and open internet. IA believes the Internet 
creates unprecedented benefits for society, and as the voice of the 
world's leading Internet companies, IA works to ensure policymakers and 
other stakeholders understand these benefits.
    Section 230 plays a critical role in empowering companies to offer 
innovative services and set and enforce policies regarding the use of 
those services. IA hopes, through our testimony, to explain: (1) how 
Section 230 enables our members' services by allowing them to take 
action against harmful activity when they find it; (2) how the law 
strikes a careful balance by barring certain types of lawsuits and 
encouraging moderation; (3) the role of the First Amendment in this 
debate; and (4) considerations for policymakers looking at possible 
amendments to Section 230 including IA's preliminary thoughts on the 
PACT Act. This testimony also provides new research, based on our 
analysis of more than 500 court decisions involving Section 230, that 
sheds light on the wide variety of parties using the law, how the law 
affects litigation, and how courts apply it.
    Many of the things people consider to be the ``best of internet'' 
are possible because of Section 230. IA's research shows that consumers 
value hearing from other consumers about their experiences before 
making major purchases, booking travel, and ordering a ride-share.\1\ 
Consumers check online reviews more frequently than recommendations 
from experts or friends. Section 230 allows users to access and share a 
wide range of information, opinions, and experiences. This type of 
sharing is at the core of many IA members' services and is what makes 
them enjoyable, useful, and engaging for their users. It is difficult 
to imagine a world where all of that would be possible if, for example, 
a travel site could be held legally responsible for every word in every 
review it hosts.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ Internet Association, Best of the Internet Survey, June 
26,2019. Available at: https://internetassociation.org/publications/
best-of-the-internet-survey/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    IA member companies recognize that in order to realize the full 
benefits of the internet, it is critical that they take action to 
prevent and respond to harmful online activities. This is essential to 
building and maintaining both user and public trust. Today's world, 
where we grapple with a global pandemic and a social justice movement 
that is a reckoning with lives lost to systemic discrimination, has 
shown both the tangible benefits of online services and the critical 
role providers play in ensuring that their services are not undermined 
and misused in ways that threaten individual lives or the public good.
    IA members have played an essential role in helping society 
transition into today's ``new normal.'' Their services allow us to stay 
connected to loved ones, order takeout to support local restaurants, 
conduct doctors' appointments via telehealth services, and even work 
from home through video conferences.
    While IA's members recognize that their platforms always have room 
for improvement, they are consistently working to find ways to make 
their services safer--whether by highlighting authoritative sources of 
accurate information about COVID-19 and addressing dangerous 
misinformation, or by working to make underrepresented and marginalized 
groups feel that they have a safe place to express themselves. Many of 
our members have made commitments as a result of recent events to do 
more, and IA as an organization is also actively working to support 
these efforts. IA has centralized and detailed member company efforts 
in response to COVID-19 as a resource for the public and 
policymakers.\2\ As part of its commitment to social justice, IA is 
building on the work in its 2019 Diversity & Inclusion Benchmark 
Report; helping underrepresented groups find employment opportunities 
with technology companies through a soon-to-be-launched job portal; and 
supporting social justice reform legislation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \2\ https://covid19.internetassociation.org/industry/response/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I. Section 230 Is Critical To Content Moderation And Content Moderation 
        Is Critical To Realizing The Value Of Online Services
    In considering possible amendments to Section 230, it is vital to 
remember the statute's history. Congress enacted Section 230, in part, 
to encourage providers of online services to voluntarily adopt robust 
content moderation policies and practices. Congress was reacting to two 
lower court cases, Cubby, Inc. v. CompuServe Inc., 776 F. Supp. 135 
(S.D.N.Y. 1991), and Stratton Oakmont, Inc. v. Prodigy Services Co., 
1995 WL 323710 (N.Y. Sup. Ct. May 24, 1995). Together, Cubby and 
Stratton Oakmont created a powerful disincentive for Internet companies 
to monitor and remove objectionable content by threatening to expose 
companies to burdensome litigation and potential liability based on 
their very efforts to moderate that content.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \3\ In Cubby, a Federal district court held that an interactive 
service provider, CompuServe, could not be held liable for allegedly 
false statements that a third-party had posted in one of its online 
forums unless CompuServe knew or had reason to know of the allegedly 
false statements. 776 F. Supp. at 139-141. The plaintiffs had sought to 
hold CompuServe liable for allegedly false and defamatory statements 
contained in a third party's daily newsletter that CompuServe hosted. 
Id. at 137, 140. The court noted that it would hardly be feasible ``for 
CompuServe to examine every publication it carries for potentially 
defamatory statements.'' Id. at 140. In granting CompuServe's motion 
for summary judgment, the court analogized CompuServe to distributors 
of third-party content such as bookstores and newsstands. Id. The court 
explained that the requirement that such distributors ``must have 
knowledge of the contents of a publication before liability can be 
imposed for distributing that publication is deeply rooted in the First 
Amendment.'' It therefore concluded that CompuServe could not be held 
liable unless it knew or had reason to know of the allegedly false 
statements. Id. at 140-141. Given the facts of the case--including that 
CompuServe exercised ``little or no editorial control'' over the third-
party content available on its platform--the court held that the 
plaintiffs had failed to set forth sufficient evidence that CompuServe 
had the requisite knowledge, and the court thus granted CompuServe 
summary judgment. Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Before the enactment of Section 230, these cases presented Internet 
companies with a difficult choice. If they voluntarily adopted content 
moderation policies and practices, they could end up like Prodigy--
treated as a ``publisher'' that could be held liable for user-generated 
content. But if they sought to avoid this liability as CompuServe had, 
they would be forced to take a hands-off approach and bury their heads 
in the sand in an attempt to avoid acquiring knowledge of objectionable 
third-party content. This dilemma is exacerbated by the immense and 
rapidly increasing volume of third-party content that online platforms 
host and are used to disseminate, which makes detecting objectionable 
content exponentially more difficult. Pre-publication review cannot be 
scaled to match the rate at which new content is posted, and 
consequently, requiring it would undermine the core value of these 
real-time, interactive services.
    By contrast, in Stratton Oakmont, a New York state court held that 
the interactive service provider Prodigy could be held liable for 
allegedly defamatory statements posted on its message boards because it 
employed staff and used software to monitor and police content in order 
to attain a reputation as a ``family oriented'' service. 1995 WL 
323710, at *2-4. The court agreed with the conclusion in Cubby that 
mere ``distributors'' may be liable for defamatory statements of others 
only if they knew or had reason to know of the defamatory statements at 
issue. Id. But the court concluded that Prodigy was instead a 
``publisher,'' liable as if it had itself made the statements, because 
the court viewed Prodigy as analogous to a newspaper that is ``more 
than a passive receptacle or conduit for news, comment and 
advertising.'' Id. As a result, the court ruled Prodigy could be held 
liable for defamatory content posted on its message boards even if it 
lacked knowledge of that content. Id. The key distinction, according to 
the court, was that unlike CompuServe, Prodigy ``held itself out as an 
online service that exercised editorial control over the content of 
messages'' on its platform. Id.
    Section 230 provides a thoughtful solution to the so-called 
``moderator's dilemma.'' It allows Internet companies to adopt and 
enforce community standards without the fear that doing so would expose 
them to an onslaught of burdensome lawsuits. In this way, Section 230 
creates critical breathing room for online providers to voluntarily 
undertake moderation of the unprecedented stream of content that users 
disseminate through their platforms. It creates a middle ground between 
the wild west of completely passive platforms and the closed-to-the-
public realm of newspapers and other media outlets that develop and/or 
hand-select content for publication. That is why the statute plays such 
a critical role in ensuring that companies of all sizes, including IA's 
members, can operate the online services that the public finds so 
valuable.
II. Section 230 Achieves The Careful Balance It Was Designed To Create
    Section 230 has been successful in achieving the goals that led to 
its enactment. IA member companies have adopted and enforced essential 
content moderation policies, just as Congress intended in enacting 
Section 230. In numerous areas--from child sexual abuse material (CSAM) 
to terrorism-related content, and from self-harm to fake reviews--IA 
member companies have undertaken decades-long and resource-intensive 
efforts to combat objectionable online content. At the same time, 
Section 230 has allowed the online economy to develop and prosper in 
the United States in ways that simply have not been replicated 
elsewhere around the globe. Section 230 has spurred the vibrant growth 
of the Internet and a wide variety of diverse platforms, while also 
permitting Internet companies to protect users, and to promote 
healthier online discourse, through responsible domestic and 
international content moderation.
    A few examples can illustrate this point.
    First, IA member companies take multifaceted approaches to 
combating CSAM on their services and in the world that are enabled by 
Section 230. For example, Microsoft donated PhotoDNA, image-matching 
software that detects CSAM, to the National Center for Missing and 
Exploited Children (NCMEC), so that it could be licensed for free to 
other entities to identify versions of previously reported CSAM. The 
use of existing and newly developed detection tools has significantly 
increased, as is evidenced by the dramatic growth in the number of 
CyberTipline reports in recent years. Today, IA member companies, 
alongside governments, civil society, and other stakeholders, 
continually work to stop bad actors from spreading CSAM online. They 
take a variety of actions, including dedicating engineering resources 
to the development and improvement of tools like PhotoDNA and Google's 
CSAI Match, assisting in the modernization of the CyberTipline through 
donations of engineering resources or funds, and engaging with law 
enforcement agencies. Many companies also proactively detect instances 
of CSAM and report to NCMEC.
    IA member companies have also engaged in serious efforts to 
eliminate content advocating or promoting terrorism. Twitter suspended 
115,861 unique accounts for violations related to the promotion of 
terrorism during the first half of 2019.\4\ Over 85 percent of those 
accounts were flagged by internal tools developed by Twitter itself, 
and many of the accounts were suspended before they ever issued even a 
single tweet. In the first quarter of 2020, Facebook took action on 6.3 
million pieces of content supporting terrorism, with 99.3 percent of 
such content internally flagged before a third party reported it.\5\ 
During the same period, YouTube removed 258,908 videos for violating 
its policies against violent extremism.\6\ IA member companies 
consistently work to quickly remove any content that advocates 
terrorism.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \4\ Twitter Transparency Report, Jan.-June 2019, Rules Enforcement. 
Available at: https://transparency.twitter.com/en/twitter-rules-
enforcement.html.
    \5\ Facebook Transparency, Community Standards Enforcement Report. 
Available at: https://transparency.facebook.com/community-standards-
enforcement#dangerous-organizations.
    \6\ Google Transparency Report, YouTube Community Guidelines 
Enforcement, Video Removals by Reason. Available at: https://
transparencyreport.google.com/youtube-policy/removals?hl=en&
total_removed_videos=period:Y2020Q1;exclude_automated:human_only&lu=tota
l_removed_videos.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    IA member companies also employ a multitude of general-purpose 
technologies to support their content moderation efforts. IA members 
provide ``report abuse'' buttons and other mechanisms so that users can 
flag problematic content or contact the companies with complaints. The 
companies also provide specific community guidelines that provide 
standards for third-party content, and they devote significant staff 
and resources to enforcing those policies. Broad collaboration with 
civil society groups and other experts informs and deepens our members' 
commitment to safety and security. In addition, the companies have 
developed sophisticated software and algorithms to detect and remove 
harmful content. In many instances, they have shared these technologies 
to help others eradicate that harmful content as well. Some companies 
also dedicate large teams of staff that can provide quick responses to 
evolving problems, including responding to user complaints and removing 
objectionable and unlawful content. These efforts are the types of 
activities that Section 230 was designed to promote. It is because of, 
not in spite of, the law that IA members are able to take action to 
create safe experiences for their users.
    Section 230 has played a particularly important role in creating 
space for online platforms to refine their approaches to content 
moderation over time. Moderating content is not easy given the enormous 
volume of content online and the sometimes-nuanced distinctions that 
platforms must make to strike the right balance between which content 
to remove and which to leave up. Our member companies recognize that 
they do not always achieve the perfect balance, but they are constantly 
learning, adapting, and updating their approaches.
    Section 230 allows online companies the room to experiment in this 
way without having to worry that they will face the heavy costs of 
litigation each time a mistake is made or someone is unhappy with a 
moderation decision. Companies can learn and make adjustments--an 
essential process that they engage in constantly.
    The difficulty of content moderation and the importance of Section 
230 is best demonstrated using an example of content that is 
universally hated--spam. Since the advent of the commercial internet, 
spammers have been intent on finding ways to flood online services with 
unwanted commercial messages. Their business is one of volume--if 
enough messages go out, even if only a small percentage are acted upon, 
it is profitable. The high volumes of spam messages can operate as a 
literal or figurative ``denial of service attack.'' They can choke 
capacity of even large providers and render services of minimal value 
to their users by obscuring the content users want to see. It is for 
these reasons that spam was among the earliest targets of proactive 
content moderation efforts and exemplifies the challenges providers 
face in keeping pace with bad actors who are determined to misuse their 
services.
    Spam detection has evolved over time from simple techniques, such 
as spam block lists and rate limiting on accounts to prevent any one 
account from sending too many messages at once, into something 
altogether more sophisticated. While many of the early techniques 
remain important tools, new algorithmic approaches that pull signals 
from a variety of sources are essential today. These more sophisticated 
tools are able to assign risk based on numerous indicators and then 
apply any one of a variety of interventions, including pausing account 
activity, requiring further account verification or passing reCaptchas 
to verify it is not automated activity, demoting suspect content, 
blocking or deleting content, and closing accounts of violators. The 
battle between spammers and service providers can be characterized as 
an arms race, as spammers quickly adapt to detection techniques and 
providers must continually respond. The automated systems that protect 
providers' services from spam may be changed on a daily, if not a more 
frequent, basis.
    The volume of spam activity actioned by IA members is staggering. 
For example:

   Facebook: In the three-month period from July to September 
        2019, Facebook took action against 1.9 billions pieces of 
        content for spam.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \7\ Facebook Transparency Report, n. 5.

   Twitter: During the first six months of 2019, Twitter 
        received over 3 million user reports of spam and challenged 
        over 97 million suspected spam accounts.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \8\ Twitter Transparency Report, n. 4.

   YouTube: In the first quarter of this year, 87.5 percent of 
        channel removals were for violations that were related to spam, 
        scams, and other misleading content resulting in 1.7 million 
        channels being removed. In addition, in the same period, 
        YouTube removed over 470 million spam comments.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \9\ Google Transparency Report, n. 6.

    Section 230 is critical to these content moderation efforts. 
Indeed, service providers sued by spammers for removing spam have 
asserted Section 230 as a defense.\10\ Section 230 is even more 
critical to efforts to address content for which there is no general 
global agreement that it is harmful or should be restricted. Providers 
develop policies across a range of issues that are extremely nuanced 
and uniquely tailored to their services, addressing a broad range of 
behaviors that are disruptive to the goal of the service they provide. 
There are frequently contrasting views about whether individual content 
moderation decisions were correct or flawed. No single solution could 
ever balance all of the competing visions of how content moderation 
ought to work. Instead, Section 230 protects a critical equilibrium 
that safeguards free expression and promotes user safety, while 
allowing providers the flexibility to respond to an ever-changing 
landscape of challenges in a way that best serves their users and their 
unique services.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \10\ See, infra, fn. 16.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
III. IA's Review of Section 230 Decisions
    Over a year ago, IA began reviewing court decisions involving 
Section 230 with a goal of developing a better understanding of how the 
law works in practice. Having now reviewed more than 500 decisions, IA 
is sharing its observations which demonstrate the need for in-depth 
study of this case law to inform the public policy debate over Section 
230. In recent years, the national policy debate around Section 230 has 
focused on a few cases that garnered national media attention or 
specific content moderation decisions by particular providers. 
Employing a holistic approach will ensure that all stakeholders have a 
comprehensive understanding of Section 230 before advocating for 
changes to the careful balance that it strikes.
    IA's findings are further described in the attached paper, along 
with a description of our methodology and the list of decisions 
reviewed. IA acknowledges that the review was not comprehensive and 
that there are inherent limitations in attempting to draw broad 
characterizations from the outcome of any stage in litigation. However, 
we found clear patterns and observations of important note for 
policymakers based on judicial decisions reviewed where Section 230 
immunity was implicated. IA believes that this initial effort provides 
a sufficient basis to support a call for a comprehensive and unbiased 
review of Section 230 before any action is taken to change the law. I 
would like to share some of our observations with you today.
A. Section 230 Benefits A Wide Range Of Entities.
    IA's review of Section 230 decisions revealed that it is not only 
large social media companies that assert Section 230 as an affirmative 
defense. The importance of Section 230 is best demonstrated by the 
lesser-known cases that escape the headlines. Online users; Internet 
service providers and website hosts; online newspapers; universities; 
libraries; search engines; employers; bloggers, website moderators and 
listserv owners; marketplaces; app stores; spam protection and anti-
fraud tools; and domain name registrars have all asserted Section 230 
immunity. These decisions show the law quietly protecting soccer 
parents from defamation claims, discussion boards for nurses and police 
from nuisance suits, and local newspapers from liability for comments 
posted by trolls.
    It is critical to keep these smaller entities in mind when 
evaluating the value of Section 230. For example, in Joyner v. 
Lazzareschi,\11\ Lazzareschi, a soccer parent and the operator of a 
local online messaging board for youth soccer called SoCalSoccerTalk, 
was sued by Joyner, a disgruntled soccer coach, for allegedly 
defamatory comments that parents made on the regional messaging board. 
While Lazzareschi would have fallen under the Section 230 definition of 
a ``provider'' of an ``interactive computer service'', the case was 
ultimately dismissed and the decision was upheld on appeal for Joyner's 
failure to meet the requirements for a defamation claim. Another 
example of a lesser-known entity to assert Section 230 is 
Allnurses.com, in the case of East Coast Test Prep LLC v. Allnurses.com 
Inc.\12\ In this case, Allnurses.com, was sued by East Coast Test Prep 
(ECTP) because two nurses made negative remarks about ECTP's services. 
While this case was dismissed at the summary judgment phase for a 
variety of shortcomings in the plaintiff's case, Allnurses.com also 
successfully argued that Section 230 protected its service from 
liability for allegedly defamatory statements made by the nurses that 
used their message board to discuss topics important to the nursing 
field, including the relative merits of test prep providers. It is 
these small fora and communities, local soccer messaging boards and 
discussions of nursing exam courses, that would be silenced by 
crippling litigation without Section 230.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \11\ No. G040323, (Cal. App Jul 10, 2012).
    \12\ No. Civ. 15-3705 (JRT/SER), (D. Minn. Jan 26, 2018).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    These examples represent just two of the seldom discussed entities 
that are among the wide-cross section of Section 230 beneficiaries. 
They are joined by local newspapers, labor unions, police associations, 
individuals, and others who provide spaces for users to discuss topics 
of interest. These entities and individuals make important 
contributions to the online ecosystem that exists today. During the 
pandemic, many of these online communities that support sharing of 
hyperlocal information, like the length of the line at the local COVID 
testing site, the health and safety measures employed by a favorite 
neighborhood restaurant, or resources for assistance such as food 
banks, play a critical role in helping us cope and recover. It is 
important for this Subcommittee to keep in mind the impact that 
changing Section 230 may have on a variety of entities and individuals 
within the online platform space.
B. Courts Dismiss Many Cases In Which Section 230 Is Raised As A 
        Defense Based On Unrelated Defects In Plaintiffs' Claims.
    Our review found that Section 230 is far from a ``blanket 
immunity'' \13\ when it comes to the law's application in the courts. 
Instead our research demonstrates that only 42 percent of decisions 
reviewed were decided primarily based on Section 230 immunity. In over 
a quarter of the decisions (28 percent), the courts dismissed claims 
without relying on Section 230 because the plaintiff failed to state a 
claim upon which relief could be granted, or because of other defects 
in their case. Courts rejected attempts to rely on Section 230 when it 
was not applicable--whether because the party asserting 230 was not a 
covered entity, an exception applied, or the party asserting 230 was a 
content provider of the information at issue. Courts carefully consider 
the issue of the service provider's role in the creation of the 
problematic content, a determining factor on whether Section 230 
applies.\14\ When rejecting complaints based on Section 230, judges 
frequently explained in detail the requirements to adequately allege 
that the provider developed--in whole or in part--the content at issue, 
and gave plaintiffs multiple tries to amend their complaints. When 
plaintiffs did raise factual issues as to the service provider's role 
in content development, courts required discovery to allow further 
investigation before rendering a judgment as to whether Section 230 
applied.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \13\ See, e.g., Executive Order on Preventing Online Censorship, 
May 28, 2020. Available at: https://www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-
actions/executive-order-preventing-online-censorship/; Department Of 
Justice's Review Of Section 230 Of The Communications Decency Act Of 
1996, at 4(a). Available at: https://www.justice.gov/ag/department-
justice-s-review-section-230-communications-decency-act-
1996?utm_medium=e-mail&utm_source=govdelivery.
    \14\ See, e.g., Enigma Software Group v. Bleeping Computer, 194 F. 
Supp. 3d 263 (2016); Tanisha Systems 3v. Chandra, 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 
177164 (N.D. Ga. 2015); Perkins v. LinkedIn, 53 F. Supp. 3d 1222 
(2014); Brummer v. Wey, 2016 NY Slip Op 31021(U); Dimetriades v. Yelp, 
228 Cal. App. 4th 294 (2014).
    \15\ See, e.g., General Steel v. Chumley, 840 F.3d 1178 (10th Cir. 
2016); Samsel v. DeSoto County School District, 242 F.Supp.3d 496 (N.D. 
Miss. 2017); Pirozzi v. Apple, 913 F. Supp. 2d 840 (N.D. Cal. 2012); 
Cornelius v. Delca, 709 F. Supp. 2d 1003 (D. Idaho 2010); Best Western 
v. Furber, No. CV-06-1537-PHX-DGC (D. Ariz. September 5, 2008); Energy 
Automation Systems v. Xcentric Ventures, Case No. 3:06-1079 (M.D. Tenn. 
May. 25, 2007); Hy Cite v. Badbusinessbureau.com, 418 F .Supp. 2d 1142 
(D. Ariz. 2005).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
C. Section 230 Protects Providers Who Engage in Content Moderation, But 
        Typically Through The Application Of Section 230(c)(1)'s 
        ``Interactive Computer Service'' Provision Not Section 
        230(c)(2)'s ``Good Samaritan'' Provision.
    In our review, only 19 of the 516 court decisions in which Section 
230 was raised as a defense were resolved on the basis of Section 230s 
(c)(2) ``good Samaritan'' clause, which provides immunity for actions 
taken ``voluntarily'' in ``good faith'' to restrict content that is 
``obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy, excessively violent, harassing, or 
otherwise objectionable.'' Furthermore, the majority of these cases 
involved provider efforts to block spam.\16\ In other such decisions, 
courts resolved claims based on Section 230(c)(1),\17\ Anti-SLAPP 
motions,\18\ the First Amendment,\19\ or for failure to state a claim 
or other deficiencies.\20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \16\ See. e.g., Holomaxx Technologies Corp. v. Yahoo!, Inc., No. 
10-cv-04926 JF (PSG) (N.D. Cal. August 23, 2011), E360INSIGHT, LLC v. 
Comcast Corp., 546 F.Supp.2d 605 (N.D. Ill. 2008); Pallorium v. Jared, 
G036124 (Cal. Ct. App. Jan. 11, 2007); America Online, Inc. v. 
GreatDeals. Net, 49 F. Supp. 2d 851 (E.D. Va. 1999).
    \17\ See, e.g., DeLima v. YouTube, 2019 WL 1620756 (1st Cir. Apr. 
3, 2019); Green v. AOL, 318 F.3d 465 (3d Cir. 2003); King v. Facebook, 
3:19-cv-01987 (N.D.Cal. Sept 5, 2019).
    \18\ See, e.g., Sikhs for Justice v. Facebook, 144 F. Supp. 3d 1088 
(N.D.Cal. 2015); Johnson v. Twitter, No. 18CECG00078 (Cal. Superior Ct. 
June 6, 2018).
    \19\ See, e.g., Davison v. Facebook, 370 F. Supp. 3d 621 (E.D. Va. 
2019); Estavillo v. Sony Computer Entm't Am., 2009 WL 3072887 (N.D. 
Cal. Sept. 2, 2009).
    \20\ See, e.g., Roberson v. YouTube, 2018 DNH 117 (D. N.H. 2018); 
Young v. Facebook, 790 F. Supp. 2d 1110 (N.D. Cal. 2011); Lewis v. 
YouTube, No.H041127 (Cal. App. January 25, 2016)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Another reason (c)(2) has not been invoked more often is that, when 
providers are sued for removing content, many of those lawsuits are 
based on assertions that the provider has violated the First Amendment 
rights of the user whose content was removed.\21\ As the First 
Amendment applies to only government actors, these cases have been 
dismissed for failure to state a claim without the necessity of 
defendants asserting or a court analyzing Section 230. In fact, courts 
have found that service providers' decisions regarding whether and how 
to display content are protected by the First Amendment.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \21\ See, e.g., Tulsi Now, Inc. v. Google, LLC; Prager University 
v. Google LLC, 951 F.3d 991 (9th Cir. 2020); amango v. Facebook, Inc., 
No. 3:11-CV-0435, 2011 WL 1899561 (N.D. NY April 19, 2011); Davison v. 
Facebook, Inc., 370 F.Supp.3d 621 (E.D. Va. 2019); Federal Agency of 
News LLC v. Facebook, Inc., 2020 WL 137154 (N.D. Cal. Jan. 13, 2020; 
Zhang v. Baidu. com Inc., 932 F. Supp. 2d 561 (S.D.N.Y. 2013); Buza v. 
Yahoo!, Inc.,, No. C 11-4422 RS (N.D. Cal. 2011).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
IV. Considerations For Policymakers
    It is of the utmost importance that policymakers tread carefully 
when considering possible changes to Section 230 or enacting any other 
laws targeting content moderation. This caution is necessary because of 
the ever-evolving nature of harmful content and Internet technology, as 
well as the complexity and variety of potential legal liability for 
online speech. This caution is also essential in light of foundational 
First Amendment principles.
A. Maintaining The Careful Balance Struck By Section 230.
    Section 230, in its current form, supports a diverse Internet 
ecosystem that provides users with reviews, places for discussion and 
lively debate, and opportunities to expand their knowledge. Without 
Section 230s protection, Internet companies would be left with a strong 
disincentive to monitor and moderate content. Section 230 removes this 
disincentive to self-regulate, creating essential breathing space for 
Internet companies to adopt policies and deploy technologies to 
identify and combat objectionable or unlawful content--or to develop 
other innovative solutions to address such content. Society benefits 
from the rules that providers voluntarily set and enforce to enhance 
user experiences as well as safety, goals that would be challenging--if 
not impossible--for the government to achieve directly due to the First 
Amendment. Through exceptions and carefully crafted language limiting 
Section 230s protections to only third-party content and activities, 
bad actors can still be held accountable when they participate in, or 
materially contribute to, illegality.\22\ Over the more than two 
decades since Section 230s enactment, the Internet continues to thrive 
due to the carefully crafted language balancing the fostering of online 
innovation with ensuring there are proper ways to hold content 
providers accountable for their actions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \22\ Fair Housing Council of San Fernando Valley v. Roommate.com, 
521 F.3d 1157, 1168 (9th Cir. 2008) (en banc). In addition, Section 
230(e) outlines the criminal law, intellectual property, state law, 
communications privacy law, and sex trafficking law exemptions from 230 
immunity.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
B. Ensuring That Any New Requirements Recognize The Flexibility 
        Required For Effective Content Moderation.
    Some proposals to change Section 230 have the potential to impact 
how service providers conduct content moderation by limiting the 
protections in the statute to just certain types of content, or setting 
new rules for how companies engage in content moderation activities. 
Policymakers considering making changes to Section 230 must recognize 
the wide cross-section of online services that rely on the law and keep 
in mind the need for flexible and non-prescriptive language. There are 
important reasons why the broad group of entities and individuals who 
qualify as providers of interactive computer services should be able to 
retain discretion and flexibility to set and enforce their rules. For 
example, content moderation teams should be encouraged to be nimble 
enough to respond to unanticipated events quickly. The urgent nature of 
the response to the video of the Christchurch attack is a good example 
of how world events can impact content moderation efforts. The 
circumstances of the Christchurch attack are precisely why providers 
need to be able to make adjustments to the techniques they use to 
battle policy violations to adapt alongside the ever-evolving nature of 
threats. Imposing overly prescriptive and burdensome requirements 
through legislation or regulations will negatively impact the Internet 
ecosystem. Without flexibility, service providers are unable to 
effectively moderate content on their platforms, which could 
dramatically reduce the quality of their services. Furthermore, online 
platforms are not uniform in their breadth, construction, business 
models, or approach to content hosting. Changes to Section 230 intended 
to address concerns with a particular platform or type of platform, 
will impact all platforms. Given the discrete but important differences 
among Internet platforms, changes to Section 230 must carefully 
consider the broad and varied impacts of legislative language on 
different platform models.
C. Aligning With Established First Amendment Principles That Apply To 
        Content Moderation.
    Any amendments to Section 230, and any other laws pertaining to 
content moderation, should take careful account of three First 
Amendment guardrails.
    First, platforms are not state actors and consequently need not 
refrain from moderating speech protected by the First Amendment. The 
First Amendment only limits the actions of state actors--that is, 
governmental entities--not private companies merely because those 
companies provide forums for speech. Courts have consistently held that 
Internet platforms are not state actors bound to follow the strictures 
of the First Amendment.\23\ Plaintiffs cannot bring suit against 
platforms alleging that the platforms somehow violated the plaintiffs' 
right to express particular speech under the First Amendment. Some have 
suggested that social media sites should be treated as public forums 
subject to First Amendment restrictions. However, most users would not 
want the First Amendment to dictate Internet platforms' content 
moderation practices as though they were state actors. If that were to 
happen, platforms would be prevented from blocking or screening a wide-
range of problematic content that courts have held to be 
constitutionally protected including pornography, hate speech, and 
depictions of violence.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \23\ See, e.g., Freedom Watch, Inc. v. Google Inc., 2020 WL 
3096365, at *1 (D.C. Cir. May 27, 2020) (per curiam); Prager Univ. v. 
Google LLC, 951 F.3d 991, 996-999 (9th Cir. 2020).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Second, the First Amendment protects the rights of the platforms 
themselves. When platforms determine what kind of platform to be and 
what kinds of content to host or prohibit, those are forms of free 
expression protected by the First Amendment. It is bedrock First 
Amendment doctrine that such editorial decision-making is 
constitutionally protected. In Miami Herald Publishing Co. v. 
Tornillo,\24\ for instance, the Supreme Court held that a statute 
requiring newspapers to provide political candidates with a right of 
reply to critical editorials violated the newspaper's First Amendment 
right to exercise ``editorial control and judgment'' in deciding the 
``content of the paper.'' \25\ Several courts have applied this 
reasoning in the online context, holding that platforms possess the 
First Amendment right to decide what content to carry.\26\ Recognizing 
this principle has never been more important. It is critical to 
allowing online communities and services to develop around common 
interests, shared beliefs, and specific purposes. It is also critical 
to allowing online services to cater to different audiences, including 
the ability to design rules to make their services age-appropriate or 
purpose-appropriate.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \24\ 418 U.S. 241 (1974).
    \25\ Id. at 258.
    \26\ See, e.g., Jian Zhang v. Baidu.com Inc., 10 F. Supp. 3d 433, 
436-443 (S.D.N.Y. 2014); Langdon v. Google, Inc., 474 F. Supp. 2d 622, 
629-630 (D. Del. 2007).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Third, the First Amendment sets a constitutional floor that ensures 
that online platforms that carry vast quantities of third-party content 
cannot be held liable for harms arising from that content based on a 
standard of strict liability or mere negligence. Applying such non-
protective standards of liability to entities that distribute large 
volumes of third-party material would violate bedrock First Amendment 
principles. The Supreme Court examined this issue over six decades ago, 
in Smith v. California.\27\ There, a city ordinance prohibited 
bookstores from selling obscene or indecent books regardless of whether 
the store owners knew the books were obscene or indecent.\28\ The 
ordinance violated the First Amendment, the Court explained, because it 
would cause a bookseller to ``restrict the books he sells to those he 
has inspected'' and thus ``impose a severe limitation on the public's 
access to constitutionally protected matter.'' \29\ This principle--
that the First Amendment gives special protection to those who act as 
clearinghouses for large quantities of third-party content--applies 
with especially great force to Internet platforms, given the 
exponentially greater volumes of content that they host and the 
important role they play in societal discourse. Were these platforms to 
face liability for distributing unlawful third-party material absent 
circumstances in which they both knew of that particular content and 
yet failed to remove it, Internet users' access to vital 
constitutionally protected speech would be severely stifled.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \27\ 361 U.S. 147 (1959).
    \28\ Id. at 148-149.
    \29\ Id. at 153.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    This trio of First Amendment principles provides important 
constitutional guardrails that protect free expression on the internet. 
Along with Section 230, they have contributed to making the Internet a 
vibrant medium that benefits so many. Policymakers addressing content 
moderation must therefore carefully consider the interaction between 
these principles and new policies before enacting new laws that could 
threaten to undermine the constitutional foundation of our dynamic 
internet.
V. The PACT Act
    Given the many crucial considerations implicated by any proposal to 
amend Section 230, IA appreciates the thoughtful approach taken by 
Senators Schatz and Thune in the ``Platform Accountability and Consumer 
Transparency Act'' or the ``PACT Act.'' IA and its member companies 
appreciate the focus in the bill on the twin goals of promoting 
transparency and accountability in content moderation. Over the last 
several years, IA member companies have been working continuously to 
enhance transparency with their users and the public about their 
community rules; how they are enforced; and how often they are 
enforced. These efforts include expanding transparency reporting to 
cover a wider range of topics including content removals for terms of 
service violations, making the rules of the service easier to 
understand and more detailed, providing additional user education and 
guidance through examples of potential rule violations, and explaining 
in more detail how rules are enforced and the potential consequences 
for violations. These efforts are just one part of how IA member 
companies approach content moderation and supplement measures such as 
easy reporting of violating content, user notices and appeals, and 
proactive efforts to find violating content. The PACT Act's focus on 
these aspects of content moderation in many ways align with IA member 
company efforts, and for that reason, IA hopes to work with the 
sponsors to ensure that the bill is able to achieve its goals without 
inhibiting flexibility and innovation in content moderation.
    IA would like to highlight two areas of concern related to the 
bill's broad scope and highly detailed requirements. With regard to the 
bill's scope, the requirements for transparency and accountability in 
Section 5, as drafted, would apply to all ``interactive computer 
services'' (ICSs), which is essentially the same group of entities that 
benefit from the protections of Section 230. As discussed above, 
Section 230 applies to a wide-range of interactive services and 
platform models including those offered by individuals, informal clubs 
or groups, and member associations. In addition, the types of services 
that fit within the term ``interactive computer service'' are likewise 
broad, covering not only social media services, but also private 
messaging, search, message boards and listservs, dating services, job 
search platforms, review sites, and more. IA is concerned that the 
requirements of Section 5 would prove too large a burden for those ICSs 
as hobbyists, volunteers, and as adjuncts to other activities. Such 
requirements may force these individuals and entities to shut down 
their projects and may discourage similarly situated individuals and 
groups from engaging in important expressive activity. There are also 
services for which transparency requirements may not make sense given 
the type of service or the purpose for which it was created. For 
example, under Section 5, review platforms would have to disclose to 
fraudsters (e.g., rival businesses or competitors of the business being 
reviewed) that their fake reviews had been detected and give fraudsters 
an opportunity to appeal the takedown of their fake review. While 
transparency is often a benefit, the burdens associated with these 
particular requirements should be carefully weighed against the 
benefits they would likely achieve. For this reason, IA hopes to work 
with the sponsors to consider potential changes to the scope of the 
bill.
    The other potential issue IA would like to share regarding the bill 
relates to the negative ramifications the highly detailed requirements 
in Section 5 could have. First, the detailed nature of the requirements 
would be extremely burdensome for all ICSs, and it would be a struggle 
for all but the most highly resourced providers to comply. For example, 
in order to comply with transparency reporting requirements, providers 
would need to rebuild the systems they use to process and track user 
reports, as well as any systems that operate independently to moderate 
content, to ensure that all of the required types of information are 
collected for future reports. Absent a long window to ramp up, 
providers may need to manually review each individual report to collect 
information for backwards-looking reports. The difficulty of complying 
could adversely impact content moderation as providers may choose to 
narrow their content policies to limit the scope of issues that would 
have to be addressed by the requirements of Section 5. Therefore, these 
requirements could unintentionally result in less moderation, rather 
than more.
    As with the scope of the bill, the Section 5 requirements would 
likely limit the diversity and richness of the different types of 
individuals and entities that are part of the online ecosystem. This in 
turn would limit consumer choice and access to information. Small 
providers in particular would feel the impact of these requirements. In 
addition, the detailed nature of the requirements would significantly 
diminish the essential flexibility providers have today to constantly 
adjust their approaches to content moderation to keep pace with bad 
actors, respond to emergencies, and focus their efforts on the 
activities that pose the highest risks to users of their services and 
the public.
    IA appreciates the opportunity to discuss the value of Section 230 
to the modern Internet and looks forward to continuing these 
conversations around our concerns and other feedback pertaining to this 
bill with the members of the Subcommittee.

APPENDIX: Internet Association, A Review Of Section 230's Meaning & 
Application Based On More Than 500 Cases (July 27, 2020).

    Senator Thune. Thank you, Ms. Banker.
    Next up is Mr. Sylvain.
    Mr. Sylvain, please proceed.

           STATEMENT OF OLIVIER SYLVAIN, PROFESSOR, 
                       FORDHAM LAW SCHOOL

    Mr. Sylvain. Thank you, Committee Chairman Wicker, Ranking 
Member Cantwell, Subcommittee Chairman Thune, Ranking 
Subcommittee Member Schatz, members of the Senate Subcommittee 
on Communications, Technology Innovation, and the Internet.
    As vexing as the problems posed by Section 230 are, I am 
honored to discuss potential reforms of the statute with you 
today. Let me get straight to it.
    Section 230 is not adapted to the ways in which many online 
intermediaries control practically all aspects of consumers' 
online experiences. The doctrine presumes that any given 
interactive computer service is no more than a publisher or 
distributor of user-generated content, unless that service 
materially contributes to the content at issue. Sir, courts 
have been generous to intermediaries under this rule, generally 
dismissing claims before discovery begins. Courts and 
plaintiffs, accordingly, never really get to learn how 
implicated intermediaries are in their distribution and 
targeted delivery of either the user content or data.
    The most powerful online intermediaries today are anything 
but publishers and distributors of user-generated content. They 
illicit, harvest, sort, and repurpose user posts and personal 
data to attract and hold consumer attention and, more 
importantly, to market this valuable data to advertisers. They 
do this unfettered by law. The result is too often lived harm 
to the everyday people whom consumer protection and civil 
rights laws and remedies exist, but, because of the protection, 
are unavailable.
    Recent civil rights litigation against Facebook's Ad 
Manager provides a vivid example of this unfair and 
underregulated political economy for user data. The social 
media giant relies on sophisticated, but imperfect, automated 
decisionmaking tools to make sense of the troves of consumer 
data that it collects. Through these processes, it creates 
hundreds of new categories in which advertisers may, as they 
wish, refine campaigns by including or excluding potential 
recipients across hundreds of dimensions. For example, 
distributors of Urdu-language music or WNDA gear can target 
specific audiences by gender, age, ethnicity, and language, to 
list just a few variables. Facebook generates these categories 
through automated algorithmic processes. Consumers, meanwhile, 
generally have no idea where they fall in the scheme. Facebook, 
for example, does not ask its consumers to identify with any 
ethnicity, and yet it slots consumers into proxies for these 
identities.
    Here's the rub. Under civil rights law, Congress forbids 
discrimination in ads on the basis of race, ethnicity, age, and 
gender in the markets for housing, education, and consumer 
credit. But, that is exactly what Facebook allowed building 
managers and employers to do. A series of blockbuster stories 
by ProPublica in late 2016 revealed that the service-enabled 
advertisers, to include and exclude consumers by proxies for 
race and age, and consumers were not the wiser for it, because 
they do not see each other's news feed.
    Soon after the ProPublica stories ran, civil rights groups 
and aggrieved plaintiffs brought cases against Facebook in 
civil and in Federal courts across the country. They alleged 
that the Ad Manager made discrimination in violation of civil 
rights laws possible. They also asserted that Facebook targeted 
ads, on behalf of the advertisers, in ways that were 
discriminatory. Through its lookalike feature, in particular, 
Facebook replicates any given advertiser's customer list, and, 
based on that list, delivers the ads far more widely to people 
who fit the profile. With regards to these recent civil rights 
cases against Facebook, the lookalike feature entrenched extant 
disparities at the expense of members of historically 
marginalized groups. None of this resembles the news groups and 
bulletin boards that Congress had in mind in 1996.
    The social media giant, nevertheless, moved to have these 
civil rights claims dismissed, pursuant to Section 230, as it 
routinely and formulaically does in practically all cases. And 
most of the time, they win. But, here the courts never got a 
chance to weigh in, because the parties settled in March 2019. 
Among other things, Facebook agreed to create a new ad portal 
for housing, employment, and credit markets to protect against 
unlawful discrimination in those settings. HUD filed a charge 
against the company soon afterwards. And, as far as I know, 
that action remains unresolved.
    Importantly, however, researchers from Northeastern 
University, Upturn, and ProPublica late last year found that, 
in spite of the settlement, Facebook's Ad Manager continues to 
distribute job ads that discriminate against women and older 
people at alarming rates. That is, even as Facebook no longer 
allows advertisers, in the first instance, to use unlawful 
proxies in hiring, the Ad Manager nevertheless continues to 
discriminate.
    This is just one example in one area of law, but it 
underscores that Section 230 has done nothing to cultivate any 
demonstrable urgency about protecting consumers in this setting 
even as intermediaries milk that data for ad revenue.
    The PACT Act is a good start at reform. The one piece I 
will emphasize here, with the limited time that I have, is the 
expansion of the exceptions under 230(e) to include civil 
government agency enforcement. I would like to see this 
expanded to include claims by private individuals under Federal 
and State law, but, even in its current form, the bill would 
allow courts to scrutinize intermediaries' practices more 
closely. This would be all the more important in cases in which 
plaintiffs allege that automated decisionmaking systems cause 
harm. I can see agencies like the FTC and HUD proceeding 
pursuant to their statutory mandate in this regard.
    Much of the PACT Act would represent the sensible reform 
that would help to vindicate consumer protection, civil rights, 
and public law protections for everyday people.
    Thanks again for the invitation. I look forward to your 
questions.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Sylvain follows:]

  Prepared Statement of Olivier Sylvain, Professor, Fordham Law School
    Committee Chairman Wicker, Ranking Member Cantwell, Subcommittee 
Chairman Thune, Ranking Subcommittee Member Schatz. Members of the 
Senate Subcommittee on Communications, Technology, Innovation, and the 
Internet,
    Thank you for inviting me to today's hearing about reforming 47 
U.S.C. Sec. 230. I have been thinking and writing about this provision 
and its attendant judge-made doctrine for the past few years. I have 
argued that the law is not adapted to the ways in which online 
intermediaries today effectively control practically all aspects of 
consumers' online experiences. The so-called ``immunity'' under Section 
230, developed in the late 1990s, continues to presume that online 
intermediaries (or ``interactive computer services'') are no more than 
than mere publishers or distributors of user-generated content. The 
courts have read the provision as a shield from liability unless a 
plaintiff in any given case successfully pleads that a defendant 
intermediary ``materially contributes'' to the content at issue.
    Pursuant to this standard, courts today have been unwilling to see 
anything but glaring direct contributions of substantive content as 
counting as ``material contribution.'' In 2020, this presumption--this 
benefit of the doubt--makes no sense. The biggest of these companies 
today design their services to elicit, collect, harvest, sort, analyze, 
redistribute, and altogether repurpose their consumers' data in service 
of their business objectives and the interests of the advertisers who 
have come to rely on them. And they use sophisticated but demonstrably 
imperfect automated decisionmaking systems to do this. (They actually 
purport that these systems, even as they structure the entirety of our 
online experiences, help them to moderate user content.)
    None of this--especially the companies' pecuniary designs on user 
data--resembles the considerations at work when Congress enacted 47 
U.S.C. Sec. 230. The relatively quaint and romantic motivations of the 
Usenet newsgroups or AOL bulletin boards were on the minds of 
legislators or judges in the 1990s. They could not foresee Big Tech's 
industrial designs on controlling and consolidating information flows 
to achieve their own commercial objectives.
    Nor does the statute's titular claim that online intermediaries' 
``Protection for `Good Samaritan' blocking and screening of offensive 
material'' do any real work. One could reasonably read Section 
230(c)(2) as the operative ``safe harbor'' under the statute, in which 
case courts would only immunize ``interactive computer services'' that 
voluntarily take good faith steps to moderate illicit or illegal user-
generated content. But, in practice, that is not what defendants, Big 
Tech companies, or their advocates have asserted. Rather, they have 
projected 230(c)(1)'s passive-voice and indirect mandate about how 
providers of ``interactive computer services'' should be ``treated'' 
onto Section 230(c)(2) in ways that effectively overshadow and 
essentially eliminate the mechanism for courts to consider whether an 
online intermediary is reasonably trying to moderate content. Because 
of this doctrine, defendants raise the Section 230 defense at the 
motion to dismiss phase, well before plaintiffs and courts ever get to 
find out how implicated intermediaries are in their control and 
administration of user content or data.
    It is time that the law and doctrine reflect our currently reality. 
This is why I am honored and eager to engage your consideration of the 
PACT Act and other reforms of the statute. For what it is worth, the 
following are, in reverse chronological order, the recent pieces I have 
written on the topic:

   Solve the Underlying Problem: Treat Social Medias as Ad-
        Driven Companies, Not Speech Platforms, Knight Foundation (June 
        16, 2020)

   Recovering Tech's Humanity, 119 Columbia Law Review Forum 
        252 (November 2019)

   A Watchful Eye on Facebook's Advertising Practices, N.Y. 
        Times (March 28, 2019)

   Discriminatory Designs on User Data, Knight First Amendment 
        Institute ``Emerging Threats Series'' (April 2018)

   Intermediary Design Duties, 50 Connecticut Law Review 203 
        (March 2018)

   AOL v. Zeran: The Cyberlibertarian Hack of Sec. 230 Has Run 
        Its Course, Law.com (November 2017)

    My views of the prevailing doctrine precede the emergent du jour 
argument that social media companies have a liberal coastal urban bias. 
I will answer inquiries from you on this question if you have them, of 
course, but, at the outset, please know that I do not believe that 
online intermediaries' editorial moderation decisions are unlawful or 
even imprudent. As I have written elsewhere, Facebook and Twitter, for 
example, have sensibly developed tools that enable their users to 
control the ways in which trolls and bigots slide into online 
``conversations'' and user-groups. They have used their 
constitutionally protected editorial prerogative to flag user content 
that they find hateful or dangerously misleading. The principal 
question I have in this context is whether these efforts are enough, 
since illegal content and advertisements continue to proliferate on 
their services.
    More pertinently, I believe that framing the question of Section 
230 reform in terms of political viewpoint or even free speech obscures 
what is truly at work: the political economy of online advertising. The 
biggest and most popular online intermediaries today are not simple 
``platforms'' for user-generated content as much as commercial services 
for targeted advertising to consumers. These companies design their 
applications and the automated decisionmaking systems that power them 
to maximize advertising revenues. Social media companies in particular 
are keenly committed to designing services and products that keep users 
viscerally engaged in service of their bottom-line. We are well past 
the discounts and coupons that retail chains include in their 
circulars.
    The current debate about Section 230 should focus instead on Big 
Tech's unprecedented power to control consumer behavior. The 
beneficiaries of the protection under Section 230 are not in the 
business of promoting free speech as much as designing services that 
optimize user engagement which, in turn, maximizes the scope and depth 
of their advertising revenue. They do this more or less unmoored by 
settled legal conventions because of the broad protection under Section 
230, a doctrinal protection that I do not think any other species of 
company in the United States has ever enjoyed.
    To be sure, their pecuniary motivation, unfettered by the threat of 
liability under the courts' broad reading of the protection under 
Section 230, has allowed an array of innovative applications for user-
generated content to proliferate. But the current legal protection 
under Section 230 has also cultivated in application developers a cool, 
above-it-all indifference to (1) public law norms and (2) the immediate 
lived harms that so much of the content and data that they distribute 
causes. Dangerously misleading public health related information, 
disinformation about elections, nonconsensual pornography, and 
discriminatory advertising, all of which may be illegal in any given 
circumstance, proliferate still because online intermediaries do not 
have to bear the responsibility for designing systems that carefully 
distribute them. The question for you is whether there is something 
legislation can do to cultivate and engender a demonstrable sense of 
social responsibility.
    If you were to ask me to make any recommendations today about 
Section 230 reform, it would first be that courts should read the 
protection for interactive computer services far more carefully than 
they have. We have seen slow but steady improvement on that front since 
the Ninth Circuit's decisions in Fair Housing Council of San Fernando 
Valley v. Roommates.com in 2008 and Barnes v. Yahoo! in 2009 and, more 
recently, perhaps, after the Second Circuit's decision last summer in 
Oberdorf v. Amazon. My humble recommendation to courts is that they 
should be far more searching than they have been in determining whether 
a defendant interactive computer services' designs materially 
contribute to the distribution of illegal content. At a minimum, 
opening the standard up in this way would allow plaintiffs to engage in 
discovery on colorable claims--a prerogative that litigants in other 
legislative fields generally have. Today, most Section 230 defenses are 
decided at the motion to dismiss, before any discovery can be had. I 
urge courts to be far more open to the pleaded claims that online 
intermediaries' designs materially contribute to illegality. But this 
is for the courts to sort out under current doctrine.
    My humble recommendation to you, as legislators, must be different, 
as you bring a different, more generalizable and prospective 
institutional authority: the exceptional legal protection that online 
intermediaries now enjoy under the statute is ripe for narrowing 
because, today, it directly causes consumer harms and sometimes 
entrenches racism, misogyny, and discrimination against members of 
historically marginalized groups. Public laws and regulations exist to 
protect people from these kinds of injuries. But, because of the 
prevailing doctrine, the entities most responsible and capable of 
protecting people bear no legal responsibility to do so.
    Thanks again for the generous invitation to testify. I look forward 
to engaging your questions as best I can.

    Senator Thune. Thank you, Mr. Sylvain.
    Well, we'll dive right into questions.
    Representative Cox, one of the most common misconceptions 
about CDA 230 is that it requires platforms to be politically 
neutral with respect to its content moderation decisions. Does 
CDA 230 require platforms to be politically neutral? And, if 
not, why not?
    Mr. Cox. No, it does not. Section 230 was never meant to 
require neutrality. To the contrary, the idea is that every 
website should be free to come up with its own approach, to let 
1,000 followers bloom. If it were otherwise, we could imagine, 
you know, how, you know, very quickly things would not work. 
The Democratic National Committee could not have its own 
website. The Republican National Committee could not. It's not 
a question of everybody having to be neutral. It is, however, 
important to distinguish that it is possible for websites to 
decide that they want to have a business model of political 
neutrality. And when they do so, they can and should be held to 
that. If they promise this to the public through their terms of 
service, through their advertising, through their, you know, 
rules of content moderation that are published, that ``We will 
do this,'' then, you know, by all means, hold them to it. And I 
think, you know, many existing laws are available for this 
purpose, including the Federal Trade Commission Act and the 
little FTC Acts in all of the States. There is a well-known 
case in the Ninth Circuit that used the common law promissory 
estoppel to require Yahoo! to honor promises to take down 
material. And so, it is in this framework that I think we 
should look at political neutrality. If these platforms are 
holding themselves out as neutral, then they should be held 
accountable.
    Senator Thune. For those who are concerned about systemic 
viewpoint discrimination by the content moderation decisions of 
platforms, wouldn't rigorous transparency requirements for 
platforms help to reveal whether there is, in fact, systemic 
viewpoint discrimination on a given platform?
    Mr. Cox. Yes. I'm a big fan of transparency. I think the 
devil always is in the details. The question is, you know, How 
steep is the compliance burden, and is it, you know, such that 
it will, you know, expose platforms to, you know, liability 
that they will need to structure around and try to protect 
themselves from, which could have some unintended consequences 
for the availability to all of us of user-generated content. 
But, the ambition of using the law and all the other tools that 
we have at our disposal to encourage and get, where 
transparency is a good one, you can imagine, for example, that 
if the rules of the road were much more explicit and 
understandable in every case, and if, when decisions were made, 
for example, to cancel somebody's account or to take down 
material, that the decision was directly tied to, you know, 
specific provisions in those rules that people could 
understand, and the decisionmaking was publicly available so we 
could all learn from it, we would all be, you know, more likely 
to abide by those terms of conduct online, because we would 
understand them. I hold we would be better off, it would be 
achieving its aims more successfully, and then, hopefully in 
the process, the Internet would be a little more civil.
    Senator Thune. And you stated in your testimony that the 
PACT Act's content moderation transparency component, and as I 
quote from your testimony, ``unquestionably constructive and 
consistent with Section 230 in its ultimate aims,'' end quote. 
What content moderation transparency requirements do you think 
are most important to apply to Internet platforms? And how do 
transparency requirements benefit consumers?
    Mr. Cox. Well, just further to the points I was making, you 
know, consumers sometimes operate in the dark. And when 
takedown decisions are made and then people get up in arms 
about it and talk about it on the Internet--we can all see what 
people are saying--you know, a lot of the complaint is, ``What 
the hell are they doing? What are they thinking? Their terms of 
service say X, but they did Y,'' and so on. So, the more 
information that is provided so that people can understand 
decisionmaking, the better off we're all going to be.
    In my written testimony, I've provided some extensive 
commentary on very specific aspects of the PACT Act that bear 
on this question. I think that, you know, ultimately what you 
need to focus on and be concerned with is, How is this going to 
operate in the real world? Is it actually doable? Is it 
workable? Are, you know, the data-collection requirements or 
the reporting requirements going to be such that they might 
actually interfere with the realtime aspect of Internet 
communications who don't wish to do that, because that's an 
essential feature of how the Internet operates and what its 
great benefits are? You know, is it going to put platforms in a 
position where the liability that we thought we protected them 
from for using user-generated content just, you know, 
evaporates? You know, we don't want to be in that position, 
either, because we know what they would do. Many of them will 
feel the need to jettison user-generated content, or to vastly 
restrict it.
    So, those are the guardrails that I think we want to 
observe. The objectives are equally clear.
    I just don't see what's in it for platforms to be opaque. 
It's not in their interest to do so. And I think that many of 
them have been making big steps in this regard. I also think 
it's important that more resources be devoted to this. The 
bigger platform, the more resources we can expect to be devoted 
to this.
    Senator Thune. On that----
    Mr. Cox. And I would----
    Senator Thune. On that----
    Mr. Cox. Yes, go ahead.
    Senator Thune. On that point, I would turn to Ms. Banker, 
because--you made this point, Representative Cox, but, Ms. 
Banker, you noted that IA's member companies have been working 
to enhance content moderation transparency with their users. 
Today is there a minimum transparent requirement platforms have 
to meet? And it seems like, as Representative Cox noted, it 
would be in their interest not to be opaque, to be as 
transparent as possible. What's happening in that space right 
now?
    Ms. Banker. Thank you, Senator.
    IA member companies are voluntarily enhancing their 
transparency around content moderation activities. The--
Internet companies actually have a long history of being 
transparent. Early transparency reports generally focused on 
topics like the disclosure of user information to law 
enforcement. But, in recent years, the companies have been 
working steadily to expand that into content moderation topics, 
as well. There is not a minimum standard. And, you know, we 
appreciate the focus of the PACT Act on this area, but do want 
to make sure that, should new requirements be put in place, 
that they're requirements that all of IA members would be able 
to fulfill. And we represent both large and small companies and 
a multitude of business models that are other than social 
media, which tends to be the focus of most of this discussion.
    Senator Thune. Yes. Thanks.
    Senator Schatz.
    Senator Schatz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    I'm going to start with Professor Sylvain. You went very 
quickly on a very important point, and I want you to flesh it 
out a little bit.
    Can you describe exactly what happens when a company 
invokes Section 230 and tries to win on summary judgment, avoid 
discovery, avoid a lawsuit? Regardless of how the statute, 
whether it be in civil rights or the extension of credit or 
education or housing, that statute would normally carry the 
day, or at least get a plaintiff a day in court. But, with 
Section 230, they just invoke it, and there's--and it's the end 
of the conversation. Could you flesh that out a little bit?
    Mr. Sylvain. Thank you for the question, Senator Schatz.
    And just to be clear, the way--the moment it's invoked in 
litigation is at the motion to dismiss, generally, not in a 
summary judgment. At summary judgment, there will be--you know, 
they will have--discovery will have--some discovery will have 
happened already. It's invoked at the motion to dismiss, before 
any discovery. And what the courts are doing, as you say, is, 
they're not reviewing the substantive statute under which any 
plaintiff is alleging some harm. What they're doing is 
evaluating whether the defendant is--meets the qualifications 
of the safe harbor, or the--as people call it, the immunity 
under Section 230----
    Senator Schatz. In other words, whether they're online.
    Mr. Sylvain. Whether--that's right--whether they're 
interacted computer service, which is, basically, whether 
they're online.
    And then, the further question, which is a point that 
Jeff--Professor Kosseff started with, is, they evaluate--you 
know, moving away from the old case law on this, evaluate 
whether they're being treated as a publisher or distributor 
in--under the claims--under the legal theory brought by 
plaintiffs. And if they are, that effectively shuts down the 
litigation. And the things that count as publishing are pretty 
expansive, so I invoked the advertising case--the Ad Manager 
case, because it underscores how broad this claim is. It 
includes the sorts of things that social media companies do 
when they distribute content. It might also include 
advertising. Indeed, it does include advertising. Right? So--
and I think----
    Senator Schatz. But, would it matter--I'm sorry to 
interrupt, but would it matter whether the platform was 
intentionally violating a--say, a civil rights statute or a 
housing statute or a banking statute? Or would that Section 230 
immunity sort of obviate the inquiry into the question of 
whether it was sort of like them hatching a plan or whether or 
not they were just simply allowing it to happen as a result of 
their systems and algorithms?
    Mr. Sylvain. That's a really good question. Could a company 
that intentionally wanted to perpetuate some harm under public 
law do so, and be comfortable doing so because they would be 
treated as a publisher in--a distributor under a claim, and 
would never--we'd never find out what their intent is? I think 
that would be--I mean, I would be curious to see what that case 
looks like--I think it would be hard to imagine, if they 
weren't also content--contributing content in that 
circumstance, if they weren't also creating and developing 
content in that circumstance. But, I suppose you might envision 
such a thing. And the closest I can think of is the Jones case, 
wherein the Sixth Circuit reviewed a plaintiff's argument--this 
young woman who alleged that she was being defamed by a site 
that elicited comments that were abusive about young women. 
And, you know, the--one of the things the Sixth Circuit is 
entertaining is whether another standard, not the material 
contribution standard, would be relevant. But, in any case, 
that comes close to the scenario you've just mapped out. The 
Section 230 defense was victorious in that case.
    Senator Schatz. In other words, we'll probably never find 
out what was in the minds of the people who were the--whether 
it's de facto discrimination or it was intentional. We would 
just not--not know, because you wouldn't get past the motion to 
dismiss.
    I have a question for all of the panelists. Everybody 
understands, who's participating in this hearing, that a series 
of rulings have established that platforms are not obligated to 
remove or address illegal content, a 1997 decision and then a 
2010 decision. And so, the question for the panel--I'll start 
with Mr. Sylvain, followed by Ms. Banker, Mr. Cox, and Mr.--and 
Professor Kosseff. Do you think the platform should be required 
to remove content that has been found to be illegal?
    Mr. Sylvain, yes or no?
    Mr. Sylvain. Yes.
    Senator Schatz. Ms. Banker?
    Ms. Banker. I think that, much like in the PACT Act, you've 
made provisions for that. I think that's a fruitful area of 
inquiry, but we'd want to make sure that there are safeguards--
--
    Senator Schatz. What does that mean? I'm sorry. It's a yes-
or-no question. Should illegal content--we're talking about not 
supposing that something is illegal. A court determines that 
this is illegal content, and you represent the Internet 
Association here. Should there be a statutory requirement that 
illegal content--court-determined illegal content be removed 
from websites?
    Ms. Banker. Our companies have no interest in hosting known 
illegal content, and most of them would remove it voluntarily. 
But, I think, if there is a requirement, we'd just want to be 
sure that there is sufficient guardrails to make sure that the 
court engaged in a thorough review. Unfortunately, we've also 
seen why--the variety of instances where these types of 
mechanisms have been subject to abuse.
    Senator Schatz. Where a court has determined that content 
is illegal, and somehow we need additional guardrails? I mean, 
it's not like that happens all the time, right?
    Ms. Banker. No, but it--frequently, plaintiffs do go into 
court seeking that type of ruling, with an eye to having 
content taken down. Unfortunately, not all of those cases, you 
know, are brought in good faith. We are lucky. Some states have 
tools, like anti-SLAPP Act provisions, that can be used to make 
sure that individuals who are exercising the right to comment 
on matters of public interest are able to do so. But, not in 
every case is a defendant able to show up and defend themselves 
in court. So, we just want to make sure that, you know, to the 
extent we are covering things like defamatory content, that 
there are safeguards.
    Senator Schatz. Congressman Cox.
    Mr. Cox. Yes, I think that a well-crafted statute could do 
a lot of good here. I see no reason that court order and 
certainly final judgments requiring the takedown of content 
already adjudged to be defamatory, for example, couldn't be 
enforced. If the law were to provide clear standards for 
platforms, telling them how they should handle defamation 
judgments, just to use the paradigm situation, especially in 
cases in which the platform hasn't been sued, such as is the 
case in the California Supreme Court with Hassell against 
Bird--I think that was 2016--and the platform isn't the party 
to the litigation, and so it's essentially succeeding in 
keeping these disputes out of its hair without fear of 
liability. This is consistent with the aims of Section 230----
    Senator Schatz. Thank you.
    Mr. Cox.--injured party would receive justice. That's a 
positive outcome for everybody except the fellow who broke the 
law and lost in court. So, it's exactly the way Section 230 
should work.
    Senator Schatz. Professor Kosseff.
    Mr. Kosseff. Yes, absolutely, if something has been 
adjudicated to be illegal, I think it should be taken down, 
just with the caveat that there have been cases of court orders 
being falsified because there are many platforms that already 
honor the court order. So, we want to just make sure we have a 
provision to take care of that.
    And I would also add that, in addition to defamation 
judgments, we might want to look at, also, family court 
judgments, because defamation can be a very expensive process 
to go through, and, in some of the most harmful content--
stalking, harassment--people are not going through the full 
defamation process. So, I think we'd want to look at that, as 
well.
    Senator Schatz. Thank you very much.
    Senator Thune. Thank you, Senator Schatz.
    Senator Wicker.
    The Chairman. Thank you very much.
    Very, very good panel. Very helpful.
    Critics of the Communications Decency Act argue that the 
words ``otherwise objectionable'' allow social media companies 
to remove content they simply dislike or disagree with, without 
facing liability. So, that raises the question how social media 
platforms inform their users about what constitutes ``otherwise 
objectionable content.''
    As I mentioned in my opening statement, the content that is 
available to be removed already includes ``obscene, lewd, 
lascivious, filthy, excessively violent, harassing,'' those 
words. So, the question is, Would it be helpful if we removed 
the somewhat ambiguous term ``otherwise objectionable''?
    So, Mr. Cox, let me start with the very beginning. What 
does ``otherwise objectionable'' mean to you, as an author? And 
what was the intent behind the inclusion of that term in the 
original statute?
    Mr. Cox. Of course, what the statute says is, you know, 
most important, and that's the standard to which people need to 
conform their content, that's what vendors need to interpret, 
and so on. I think what I intended, what Ron intended when 
originally we wrote this, and what Congress intended when it 
considered the legislation and voted for it, were all 
consistent with how we would want it to work. And that is that 
this string of words that's followed by ``otherwise 
objectionable,'' you know, has to be read as a whole. It's a 
well-established rule of statutory interpretation that when 
general words follow specific words in a statutory enumeration, 
the general words are construed to embrace only things similar 
in nature. It's a legal rule known as ``ejusdem generis,'' 
which is Latin for ``of the same kind.'' It's a rule of long 
standing that's been reaffirmed by the U.S. Supreme Court in 
the 21st century. So, the words ``otherwise objectionable'' 
have to be understood with reference to the list of specific 
things that precedes them. It's not an open-ended grant of 
immunity for editing content for any unrelated reason a website 
can think of.
    But, it's necessary not to be too stingy in, you know, 
setting out in the statute, you know, what is covered, because 
there are a lot of really bad things we'd like to see taken 
down from the Internet, some of them maybe not invented yet, 
that would be, you know, just as objectionable and just as, you 
know, categorically fitting as what we've listed specifically. 
So, we don't want to deprive websites the opportunity, you 
know, to keep their sites clean and civil and so on. But, 
that's the rubric. You know, it's--it doesn't take you far 
afield into anything that I personally idiosyncratically as a 
website don't like. That clearly is not what the statute says. 
And one hopes----
    The Chairman. What--Mr. Cox, what about it--political 
speech? Does ``otherwise objectionable content'' include 
political speech?
    Mr. Cox. Well, you know, political speech sounds like a 
broad category, but it's easy enough to imagine that somebody 
decides to take something down because they disagree with it. 
You know, ``You say that taxes should be higher, I say they 
should be lower. I don't like what you said, and I'm taking it 
down.'' You know, that's not a good reason to invoke Section 
230. That's not what that Good Samaritan piece is all about. 
And I think that you would have to find some other reason to be 
protected for doing that. And there are plenty of other good 
reasons that a website can say, ``We don't want to put your 
political point of view up here.''
    The Chairman. OK.
    Mr. Cox. But, not Section 230.
    The Chairman. Let me quickly move to Ms. Banker.
    What type of content do your member companies consider to 
be ``otherwise objectionable'' that--where the content is not 
already covered by the preceding terms of the statute, which I 
just quoted in my question to Representative Cox?
    Ms. Banker. Thank you, Senator.
    There's a wide range of types of content that are covered 
by our member companies' policies, and they are often dictated 
by what the business model is of the particular company. So, in 
addition to social media members, we also have companies that 
have travel information, you know, dating sites, job sites. And 
what's appropriate for one of those platforms may not be 
appropriate for one of the others. So, it's really important 
for our member companies that they have broad protections to be 
able to engage in the type of content moderation that helps 
users have a positive experience on their services and also 
builds trust and confidence in their services.
    One example is one I used in my testimony, which is spam, 
which is something that courts have applied ``otherwise 
objectionable'' to. And I think, you know, obviously, it has a 
broad impact on the usability and enjoyment that people have 
around online services.
    The Chairman. Why don't we just add ``spam'' to the 
definitions, and take out ``otherwise objectionable''?
    Ms. Banker. I think you can certainly do that. I think that 
that would be narrow, and there are many things that we cannot 
necessarily predict today. Many of our member companies, for 
example, have taken positions against hate speech on their 
platforms, and a narrow definition of ``otherwise 
objectionable'' could very well, you know, inhibit their 
ability to feel like that's something that they can do.
    The Chairman. Thank you.
    Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Senator Thune. Thank you, Senator Wicker.
    In my day, ``spam'' was a meat product, so we'll have to 
define that, probably, in the amendment, too.
    Next up is Senator Klobuchar.

               STATEMENT OF HON. AMY KLOBUCHAR, 
                  U.S. SENATOR FROM MINNESOTA

    Senator Klobuchar. Thank you very much.
    And thank you, to you, Senator Thune and Senator Schatz, 
for not only holding this hearing, but really walking into this 
and trying to take this on. I truly appreciate it. I think we 
all know that Section 230 has played an important role in 
allowing the Internet economy to develop from its humble 
beginnings, but now these aren't just scrappy startups anymore. 
They are, at times, trillion-dollar companies and some of the 
largest companies in our global economy, and raises many 
questions of how Section 230 is not working, and changes that 
must be made. And I have some other views on the antitrust side 
that I'll save for Judiciary, but this is our focus today.
    So, I've done a lot of work in the area of misinformation 
in elections with the Honest Ads Act. And, Mr. Sylvain, one of 
the most heartbreaking unpaid ads that went out and was 
targeted on African-American pages in the 2016 election was a 
picture of an African-American woman, and it said, ``Why wait 
in line in this election? You can text your vote for Hillary at 
83456,'' or pick some numbers. To me, it was a crime, but it 
spread all over the Internet and was targeted at their pages.
    In your testimony, Mr. Sylvain, you note that Section 230 
has helped perpetuate discrimination and racism against members 
of historically marginalized groups. Do you believe that 
proposals to reform it should consider the spread of election-
related disinformation and how it is targeted at certain 
groups?
    Mr. Sylvain. Thank you for the question, Senator Klobuchar.
    Yes, I do. The trick is, of course, trying to sort out how 
to do that. One would be allowing the Federal Elections 
Commission, presumably, to entertain enforcement actions 
consistent with what the PACT Act sets out. But, you might 
imagine civil rights groups also being able to initiate actions 
if this is the kind of electioneering that is against the law. 
Section 230 does pose an obstacle for that.
    One question that I'd like to ask in this context is 
whether the law does, indeed, engender a sense of obligation--
of civic obligation. And in a circumstance, the one you've just 
described, I suppose it might, after the fact; but, in the 
first instance, it obviously didn't. And so, there are a 
variety of circumstances under which we can envision a statute 
being written in ways that do encourage intermediaries to 
intervene before the damage is done. And the conventional way 
we do that is--as Senator Schatz, earlier on, said--is 
articulated in law. Online intermediaries are immune from that 
obligation, because they----
    Senator Klobuchar. Right.
    Mr. Sylvain.--might act, under the doctrine, as a publisher 
or a distributor.
    Senator Klobuchar. And, you know, the other way I think 
about it is just with this pandemic and the misinformation 
going out. Last month, one study found that 38 percent of 
Americans believe that the coronavirus outbreak has been 
overblown. And, just last week, Facebook had to suspend a group 
for spreading disinformation about wearing masks. And I just 
think, again, it's just a visceral reaction that I have, and I 
think many lawmakers should have, regardless of party, when 
these platforms are used in that way.
    Let me turn to you, Mr. Cox.
    Thank you, Mr. Sylvain.
    I noticed--I listened carefully in your testimony, and you 
talked about transparency, and you talked about--Congressman, 
about how you wrote the law to consider the future, which I 
truly appreciate. And if you knew then what you know now about 
the importance of large platforms in our election, the 
oversized importance, and how they've been exploited by foreign 
adversaries, which has been validated by Trump intelligence 
officials, to influence and undermine our democracy, would you 
have written any protections for our democratic system into 
Section 230?
    Mr. Cox. Well, I think that watching the case law develop 
over the last quarter century has been quite an eye opener. And 
when all of you retire from Congress and have a chance to watch 
what the courts do with your handiwork, it will, in many cases, 
make you proud, and, in other cases, disappoint you. It's--so, 
some of what has gone in interpretively with Section 230 has 
shocked me. And I would say most of the courts have read the 
statute and gotten it right.
    I think one of the most important parts of the statute is 
the definition in (f)(3) that covers the situation in which a 
platform, itself, is actually involved in the illegal content 
or activity or conduct. This is not something that, you know, 
came to our attention in later years, after we wrote the law. 
We thought about this at the time, and we wanted to make sure 
that if the website was actually the problem, that the website 
could be prosecuted criminally and it could be sued civily.
    Senator Klobuchar. Mr.----
    Mr. Cox. So, it's taken away. So, what I would do, Senator 
Klobuchar, if I were, you know, back then in 1996, and knowing 
what I know now in the 21st century, is probably write a 30-
page essay around section--subsection (f)(3).
    Senator Klobuchar. OK. But, we don't have--the 30-page 
essay isn't going to stop the Internet mess that has been 
created when it comes to these political ads. And our problem 
is that we don't have any requirements in place right now for 
disclaimers or disclosures, not just for the campaign ads. And 
some of the platforms have either stopped running political ads 
or they have done it themselves. But, it is a complete 
mishmash, what is going on. And we have a situation where they 
don't have to put disclaimers, disclosures. I'm not just 
talking about campaign ads. I'm talking about issue ads. And 
billions and billions of dollars have migrated from TV, radio, 
and newspaper that have those requirements over to online 
platforms that don't. And that is our issue. And we--Senator 
McCain did the bill with me. Senator Graham is now a cosponsor 
of the bill. And it is separate and apart from 230, but it 
would help with this type of illegal activity. And that's 
what--why I bring it up to you now.
    Mr. Cox. ----
    Senator Klobuchar. OK. All right.
    Thank you.
    Senator Thune. Thank you, Senator Klobuchar.
    Senator Fischer. Senator Fischer? Senator Fischer, you want 
to turn your mic on?

                STATEMENT OF HON. DEB FISCHER, 
                   U.S. SENATOR FROM NEBRASKA

    Senator Fischer. Am I on?
    Senator Thune. There you go. Yes.
    Senator Fischer. OK. Thank you.
    Congressman Cox, in your testimony, you described the First 
Circuit's dismissal of BackPage.com as an outlier. And you 
noted that the court did not reach the sensible decision on the 
law in the first place. Yet, we continue to hear concerns from 
law enforcement that Section 230 limits their ability to 
undertake enforcement actions in cases dealing with illegal 
content online. Clearly, we're dealing with daylight between 
these takes on the law, here. So, I know that Senator Schatz 
touched on this in his question and also Senator Klobuchar. In 
your answer to her, you addressed some of the concerns on 
Section 230, the effects on hindering case discovery in 
prosecution. I'd like to ask you how we can best support 
enforcement actions to keep illegal content off of the 
Internet.
    Senator Thune. Senator Fischer, who was that directed to?
    Senator Fischer. Congressman Cox.
    Senator Thune. Chris, are you there?
    Mr. Cox. Thank you, Senator. Yes, I'm here. And excellent 
question. And it's the right focus. Because, as is noted, it 
was the original intent of this law to be completely consistent 
with law enforcement aims and also with civil redress. So, what 
we want to do is, again, punish the guilty and protect the 
innocent.
    The law gives us tools that aim in the right direction. 
First of all, Federal criminal law is completely unaffected by 
Section 230. And State law that's consistent with Section 230, 
likewise. What we'd like to do, on the law enforcement side, I 
think, is get the states more deeply involved. And one way to 
do that and not lose the benefits of a uniform national policy 
that Section 230 represents would be to extend the limited 
opportunities that we have in law right now for State attorneys 
general to be deputized by the Department of Justice to enforce 
Federal law and/or State laws that are, you know, run in 
parallel with the Federal law when Federal law is also 
violated. And the PACT Act, you know, gets, to a certain 
extent, some of this going. I think there's even more that we 
could do, and I've mentioned, you know, specifically how in my 
written testimony.
    On the civil side, just a quick word about how the law 
ought to operate. I think it is vitally important that there be 
objective standards that judges could apply at the pleading 
stage, where you have to assume that all the allegations in the 
complaint are true, and determine whether or not a website, you 
know, has to, you know, enter upon a long litigation involving, 
you know, civil discovery and so on. I don't think that every 
case should go into discovery ``just because.'' And so, the 
nice thing about Section 230 is, it has an objective test: Were 
you a content creator, or did you contribute or develop it? I'd 
like to keep that in anything that we do, because otherwise the 
sheer volume of third-party information on the Internet would 
mean that every single piece of content now, you know, is a 
potential 3- to 7-year litigation.
    Senator Fischer. Right. Thank you.
    Mr. Kosseff, would you also comment on the tension that we 
see with Section 230 and with law enforcement?
    Mr. Kosseff. Yes. So, I fully agree with Congressman Cox 
about providing state--the states with the ability to enforce 
both Federal law as well as State laws that parallel Federal 
law. The only concern might be if there were 50 different 
significant variations of State laws applying to Internet 
platforms, which we see in other areas of the law, like data 
security. I also think that the use of the existing Federal 
criminal exception is very important. For example, Backpage 
having been shot down a few days before FOSTA was signed into 
law because of that Federal criminal exception. But, I fully 
agree that there should be some balance to allow some State 
enforcement.
    Senator Fischer. You know, we're seeing case law that's 
been developed that's protecting a wide range of platforms for 
many different types of claims there. How do you address that, 
then? What do we need to do?
    Mr. Kosseff. Just to clarify, civil claims? Yes. I mean, 
obviously, because of the increase in the complexity of the 
Internet, there is a wider variety of claims that go far beyond 
defamation. And I think, as Congressman Cox said, the key is, 
Did the platform contribute, in whole or in part, to that 
content? And if it did, then then Section 230 is not going to 
apply.
    Senator Fischer. OK. Thank you.
    Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Senator Thune. Thank you, Senator Fischer.
    Next up, Senator Blumenthal.

             STATEMENT OF HON. RICHARD BLUMENTHAL, 
                 U.S. SENATOR FROM CONNECTICUT

    Senator Blumenthal. Thanks very much, Mr. Chairman.
    Senator Thune. And in person. In person.
    Senator Blumenthal. In person.
    I really want to thank you and Senator Schatz for having 
this hearing and for your efforts to take a broad look at the 
continued viability of Section 230 and the need for reform. And 
I think if there's a message to the industry here is, it is: 
the need for reform is now. There's a broad consensus that 
Section 230, as it presently exists, no longer affords 
sufficient protection to the public, to consumers, to victims 
and survivors of abuse, and others who deserve greater 
protection.
    Earlier this month, the Judiciary Committee overwhelmingly 
approved the EARN IT Act. In fact, it--the vote was unanimous. 
It's a reform to Section 230 specifically crafted to fight 
online child sexual exploitation. I have worked with Senator 
Graham on it, to go back to Senator Schatz's comment at the 
beginning. We actually engaged in bipartisan legislating on the 
EARN IT Act to modify it in committee with a manager's package 
that met just about all of the potential real objections, 
including the impact on encryption.
    While working hand-in-hand with survivors on the EARN IT 
Act, I was struck by the predicament that they face in 
combating sexual abuse of children. And I really want their 
voices to be heard today. And so, I'm going to ask that we make 
a part of the record a statement from Nicole, whose mother--
whose daughter was a victim of sexual abuse, and she said--and 
I'm quoting, if there's no objection, Mr. Chairman----
    Senator Thune. Without objection.
    [The information referred to follows:]

    
    
    
    
    
    

    Senator Blumenthal. Thank you. ``Child sexual abuse is one 
of the worst things that anyone can endure. The production, 
distribution, and possession of CSAM make it so the abuse is 
relived every time the material is viewed or shared.'' She 
fought, for years, to rid the Internet of those abusive images, 
and many of them are still there. Her child was abused for 7 
years.
    So, we know that these images can spread like wildfire, in 
milliseconds, each time victimizing the survivor again. The 
images of Nicole's daughter were shared 168,474 times by 
thousands of predators on social media, each time a new trauma, 
decade after decade.
    I appreciate the Chairman and the Ranking Member's work, 
but I'm very concerned about the burden that's placed on the 
victims and survivors like Nicole. If we take Nicole's 
nightmare, the images of sexual abuse of Nicole's child were 
shared on Facebook. Under the PACT Act, to achieve any kind of 
remedy against Facebook, Nicole would have to undertake a 
number of steps. First, she'd have to go to court and obtain an 
order declaring the images illegal, an unnecessary step, or it 
should be, when it's plainly clear her child was sexually 
abused. And then Nicole would have to submit to Facebook a 
sworn statement containing the court order and, quote, 
``information reasonably sufficient to permit Facebook to 
locate the content.'' Again, the burden on the victim. She 
would have to find all the abuse images on Facebook, herself, a 
tremendous burden. And only then, if Facebook failed to act, 
could Nicole go to court to guarantee that the image is taken 
down. Again, the burden on the victim.
    The PACT Act does not provide any incentive for Facebook to 
police its own platform. Instead, it puts the obligation on 
Nicole. It is, unfortunately, cumbersome, costly, time-
consuming, and it would offer Nicole no real relief in ending 
her daughter's nightmare. And, in the meantime, those images 
would spread as she had to undertake the burden and the 
obstacle of seeking a court order. Going to Facebook, going 
back to court, and then seeking additional litigation to 
guarantee that the image is taken down, the images would be 
spreading.
    Under the EARN IT Act, Nicole could go straight to court, 
stop the images, and, if Facebook has failed victims, a court 
can require real changes in behavior and impose actual 
remedies, with real teeth, that provide incentives for Facebook 
to do better. And what applies to Facebook here would apply to 
all of the platforms. They can no longer be regarded simply as 
a independent and immune means of conveying a message without 
any responsibility, any accountability. To quote Nicole, ``The 
EARN Act is about the safety of kids, and there is nothing more 
important than protecting them.'' I encourage my colleagues to 
listen to her words.
    Thank you.
    Senator Thune. Thank you, Senator Blumenthal.
    Senator Moran.

                STATEMENT OF HON. JERRY MORAN, 
                    U.S. SENATOR FROM KANSAS

    Senator Moran. Chairman Thune, Ranking Member Schatz, thank 
you very much for this hearing.
    Thank you, for our witnesses, for joining us.
    This is a question intended for all of our witnesses. 
Increased automation in the form of artificial intelligence to 
improve content moderation and other functions used by 
technology companies, along with many other sectors, many 
critics and policymakers, including me from time to time, have 
called for certain degrees of algorithmic transparency to 
ensure increased consumer insight in how automated 
decisionmaking is informed, but there is also an inherent 
question of preserving the proprietary value of innovative 
algorithms that fuel the competitive drive among industry 
actors.
    How should we, as policymakers, consider improving 
algorithmic transparency for consumers without upsetting the 
economic competitiveness and innovation pursued by the 
industry?
    It's odd asking questions to no one I can see.
    Senator Thune. Who wants to take the first stab at that 
one?
    Mr. Cox. Well, I'd like to go second----
    [Laughter.]
    Mr. Cox.--but, since nobody is speaking up, I will put my 
oar in the water.
    You know, this is the future. Increasingly, we're going to 
see artificial intelligence taking over, not just social media 
decisionmaking about how they promote material and so on, but 
really all of the management of data across the Internet, in 
all manner of contexts. And it raises questions, in 
jurisprudence, about liability and responsibility, because if 
people can, in the future, say, ``The computer did it, and none 
of us knew that that was going to happen, we had no actual 
knowledge,'' then it would become, you know, the greatest 
loophole ever invented into law.
    I think we need to not be distracted by the complexity--and 
there is a good deal of it--of code-writing and the way that 
algorithms are deployed, and the way that artificial 
intelligence increasingly is being deployed, and stick with 
enduring principles of the law, as best we can.
    I would take this all the way to a principle of writing 
statutes and drafting to try to avoid all the jargon, to the 
extent you can, because, when you put that jargon in the 
statute, one of the unintended consequences is that compliance 
is now going to adhere to whatever tech you put in the statute, 
and it prevents them from advancing and coming up with the next 
best thing. So, stick with general principles.
    And what's the general principle here? It is that human 
beings write the code. So, ultimately, I think the simple 
answer is, imagine a room full of 50 people that did the same 
thing that the algorithm did, and what would you do? What would 
the legal result be in that case? And I think that that will 
lead us to the right answer.
    Senator Moran. Anyone want to take the second position that 
Congressman Cox wanted to have?
    Mr. Sylvain. If Representative Cox doesn't mind, I'll take 
the second position. I'm grateful that he went first.
    First, I may be wrong on--I'll be happy to be corrected--I 
thought there was a Algorithmic Accountability Act in 
consideration on the Hill. So, I take Senator Moran's question 
to be addressed to that, as well.
    There are a couple of ways to--I--so, I agree that it has 
to be part of the way we think about intermediaries. My 
testimony is addressed to automated decisionmaking systems, and 
I'm particularly interested in the question of how we render 
them accountable. And one of the ways we might do that is 
requiring some kind of--what people who write in this, 
including Andrew Selbst, who's written about this a lot, is an 
algorithmic impact statement evocative of the sort of things we 
envision in other areas of law. So, that's one way of making 
this work.
    But, for what it's worth, it also speaks to the question of 
what we are rendering accountable. For those people who write 
and study in this area, there is a question of the extent to 
which any given algorithm or automated decisionmaking is 
explainable and understandable to most people. And generally 
they're not. Most of us--Representative Cox, right?--are not 
code-writers. But, on the other hand, there might be a way to 
convey it in ways that are meaningful to the public, and an 
impact statement might be in that vein.
    Senator Moran. Thank you.
    Mr. Kosseff. I'm happy to go next, just to echo what was 
said before. And what I would just add is that behind 
algorithms, there are policies that are informing them, and I 
think the first principle is to make policies as transparent as 
possible. And we're seeing some progress on that. I would point 
to Facebook, I believe, last year, releasing a far more 
detailed list of its community standards, not only with just 
principles, but with some fairly specific examples of what is 
allowable and what's not allowable. And I think that's really 
at least a first step in any transparency, is understanding 
what policies are driving this.
    Senator Moran. Thank you.
    Senator Thune. Thank you, Senator Moran.
    Senator Udall. Remotely. Senator Udall.

                 STATEMENT OF HON. TOM UDALL, 
                  U.S. SENATOR FROM NEW MEXICO

    Senator Udall. Yes, you got me?
    Senator Thune. There you go. Got you.
    Senator Udall. Great. Thank you.
    Chairman Thune, thank you so much, you and Ranking Member 
Schatz, for calling this hearing and focusing on this really 
important issue.
    President Trump's recent executive order on preventing 
online censorship directs various Federal agencies to protect 
against online censorship, under the claims that, quote, 
``online platforms are engaging in selective censorship that is 
harming our national discourse,'' end quote.
    Just yesterday, the NTIA filed a petition for rulemaking 
with the FCC, asking the agency to develop rules to moderate 
online content under Section 230. As Commissioner Rosenworcel 
has said, the FCC shouldn't take this bait.
    This question is to all of you on the panel. Can you speak 
to the legal grounds of the President's executive order? And 
what recommendations would you make to the Department of 
Justice and the FCC for how they should evaluate this 
information to maintain the constitutional protections under 
the First Amendment?
    Mr. Sylvain. I guess everyone wants to go second. I'll take 
a shot, here.
    I am deeply skeptical about the nature of the way in which 
the FCC could proceed, although, you know, I can envision it 
happening, but the FCC would have to do a lot of work to 
reverse the ways in which it has, basically, discounted its 
obligations or authority under law to interpret and apply 
Section 230. This is to say nothing of whether there is a--
there are First Amendment concerns with regards to the SEC 
regulating speech.
    And I want to go further and say, in my opinion, the focus 
on user speech is a distraction from actually the way in which 
the constitutional protections for intermediaries works. 
Ultimately, they are the ones to resolve what their interests 
are with regard to what they allow online, even consistent with 
230(c)(2). And that's my own view.
    I also think the focus on speech, as though these platforms 
are speech platforms, as such, is distracting. Consistent with 
my point in the opening, these are commercial entities that 
traffic in user data. And they have the prerogative to do so, 
but there are few constraints on what they can or can't do.
    Senator Udall. Thank you.
    Others, jump in, please.
    Mr. Cox. Well, I'll take the opportunity to go second, 
which I was, you know, always hoping for.
    [Laughter.]
    Mr. Cox. Because now that Professor Sylvain has laid the 
groundwork, it's much easier for me.
    A couple of things. When originally we wrote what--became 
Section 230, when Ron and I introduced a freestanding bill, it 
was called the Internet Freedom and Family Empowerment Act, and 
mostly what became Section 230. It contained a provision that 
explicitly denied the FCC authority in the area of regulating 
the content of speech. And what I said on the floor at the time 
is, we don't want to turn the FCC into the Federal Computer 
Commission.
    I would like to see the FTC be more active in this area. 
I'd like to see the FTC, you know, holding platforms to their 
promises. You know, when they advertise that they're neutral 
platforms, by all means hold them to it. I think the error in 
the executive order that President Trump issued, in analysis--
the error in analysis--is in thinking that there's something 
about Section 230 that requires all websites, including the 
Republican National Committee's website, the DNC website, to be 
politically neutral. That's just wrong. The law can't--
shouldn't--require that, and it makes no sense to do so.
    But, when platforms adopt business models, when they make 
promises to consumers, when they have rules of the road of 
content moderation, when they have terms of service, those are, 
you know, essentially, advertisements and contractual promises 
that can be enforced. That's why we have an FTC. It's why we 
have State consumer protection laws. Let's enforce them. Let's 
use----
    Ms. Banker. I would just add to both of those comments and 
say I think it's incredibly important, when we think of how--
availability of Section 230 or it going away completely, what 
is the law going to do then? And I think there have been a 
number of cases brought against providers, in the last several 
years in particular, over content removals. And in those cases, 
many times what the users whose content was removed are arguing 
is that their First Amendment rights were violated. And we have 
repeatedly--you know, without any involvement in Section 230--
and we've repeatedly seen courts say, ``No, these private 
companies are not--they're not State actors, so they cannot 
violate First Amendment rights.''
    So, I think the focus on Section 230 to address the problem 
that the EO aims to address is a little bit misplaced, because 
I don't think it's necessarily a Section 230 problem, I think 
it's more--if you consider it a problem, it's probably a First 
Amendment problem.
    Senator Udall. Professor Kosseff?
    Mr. Kosseff. Yes, I would just echo what's been said, and I 
would also just add--and this isn't--there have been a number 
of proposals--this isn't specific to the executive order, but 
the one challenge in all of this--and there have been a lot of 
discussion about conditioning Section 230 protections on 
certain editorial behaviors. And that runs into the additional 
First Amendment consideration of unconstitutional conditions. 
We've seen, in other areas of the law, where, if you withhold a 
government benefit, that--in exchange for a specific type of 
speech--that can run into constitutional problems. It's kind of 
a unique situation, so it requires more exploration, but I 
think that's at least one thing to look out for.
    Senator Udall. Thank you.
    You know, this executive order came out after the 
President's many public complaints that various online outlets 
are not favorable to him. And Twitter, notably, flagged one 
post for inciting violence when he tweeted, quote, ``When the 
looting starts, the shooting starts,'' end quote.
    So, I think I'll end there, Mr. Chairman.
    Thank you so much, to all the panelists.
    Senator Thune. Thank you, Senator Udall.
    Senator Gardner.

                STATEMENT OF HON. CORY GARDNER, 
                   U.S. SENATOR FROM COLORADO

    Senator Gardner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Thank you, to the witnesses, for appearing today.
    According to Pew Research, approximately 5 percent of 
Americans used a social media platform in 2005. Five percent, 
the first year they started collecting that data. As of last 
year, that number had grown to at least 72 percent. Globally, 
social media and Internet adoption numbers continue to rise. 
Most of the world's biggest social media platforms--things like 
YouTube, Facebook, Twitter, WhatsApp, and more--are companies 
founded right here in the United States. This growth in 
activities spurred by American innovation that I hope will be a 
boon, and should be a boon, to free speech, democratic values, 
and greater understanding of differences around the world.
    You certainly see that reflected in the mission statements 
of these companies today. YouTube says, ``Our mission is to 
give everyone a voice.'' Facebook says their platform exists 
to, ``give people the power to build communities and bring the 
world closer together.'' Twitter wants to, ``give everyone the 
power to create and share ideas and information instantly, 
without barriers.'' And WhatsApp says their goal is to ``let 
people communicate anywhere in the world, without barriers.'' 
And yet, the most recent Freedom on the Net report from Freedom 
House concluded that Internet freedom declined yet again for 
the ninth year in a row, even as social media adoption 
continues to rise.
    So, Congress and the world should ask itself, Why is that? 
For one, government censorship is alive and well around the 
world. In countries with repressive regimes, questions of 
intermediary liability always involve that repressive regime at 
the table. Each of these major social media platforms I've 
mentioned--YouTube, Facebook, Twitter, and WhatsApp--are banned 
and behind the great firewall in China. Their missions of 
empowering people and sharing information, without barriers, 
don't exactly align with the Chinese Community Party or the 
Chinese Community Party platform.
    Even in allied countries like Germany, international 
organizations like Human Rights Watch have lambasted local 
content moderation laws as unaccountable over-broad censorship 
rather than sensible public empowerment. The United States 
should be pushing back on this global tide of government 
regulation, censorship, and blocking.
    There is no question. Any social media platform who claims 
to be a forum for all and then engages in politically motivated 
content moderation is not a platform living up to its stated 
mission. And those platforms must be more transparent. But, 
should Congress involve itself in enforcing so-called neutral 
content moderation? What does ``neutral content moderation'' 
even look like?
    Congressman Cox, we're lucky to have you here today 
testifying as one of the two major authors of Section 230, 
someone who can give us that clarity about what Congress really 
intended when it drafted this statute, insights obviously 
critical to policymakers as we consider next steps and whether 
or not this statute needs amending at all.
    On August 4, 1995, going into the wayback machine, you took 
to the House floor and declared, ``Our amendment will do two 
basic things. First, it will protect computer Good Samaritans 
from taking on liabilities such as occurred in the Prodigy 
case. Second, it will establish as the policy of the United 
States that we do not wish to have content regulation by the 
Federal Government of what is on the Internet, that we do not 
wish to have a Federal Computer Commission with an army of 
bureaucrats regulating the Internet, because, frankly, the 
Internet has grown up to be what it is without that kind of 
help from the government.''
    So, Congressman Cox, do you think Congress has paid enough 
attention to the second tenet of what you said in 1995 was a 
fundamental aspect of Section 230? Or do you believe Congress 
should still view Section 230 as what helped establish the 
policy of the U.S., that we do not wish to have content 
regulation by the Federal Government?
    I'll turn it over to you, and then I've got another 
question for you.
    Mr. Cox. Well--and that's great history. I have a twofold 
answer to your question. The first is, I do think that Congress 
has paid attention and observed that policy as the policy of 
the United States in practice, because it has not, to date, 
imposed, you know, stifling regulation on the Internet. But, I 
will say that the public discussion right now around these 
issues is paying little heed to that same norm. And so, as we 
reevaluate where we're headed next, I think the question's very 
much on the table.
    You noted the Freedom House annual reports on how we're 
doing across the planet with social media. And what we see in 
their report is not just that China and Russia and Iran and 
Saudi Arabia, all known cases, are using social media as a 
means of social control, reading people's, you know, 
communications and punishing them, you know, if they're online, 
and so on. And then you have got a system of social credit, you 
know if you don't agree, you can't go to school, you can't get 
an apartment or get in an airplane, leave the country, what 
have you. The point----
    You know, our model--different, but--this is a problem in 
38 countries covered in their last report----
    Senator Gardner. Yes. And I have a----
    Mr. Cox.--around the world.
    Senator Gardner. I'm out of time. I want to follow it up 
with a quick question, here.
    As the world continues to consider aggressive Internet 
regulation and Goulburn at Freedom continues to weigh in, it's 
more important than ever that we are communicating American 
ideals about fundamental human rights and First Amendment 
protected free speech abroad. How should Congress better enlist 
the support of technology companies in that mission? What more 
can Congress and American tech companies be doing to make the 
Internet a truly free, or a freer, and safer place for all?
    Mr. Cox. Well, you know, I'll--go--I'm sorry, go ahead.
    Senator Gardner. No, no, that's it. Go ahead.
    Mr. Cox. You know, the challenge that our global companies 
face in the 38 countries highlighted by Freedom House, for 
example, where they're trying to control the Internet and use 
it as a means of control are very significant, because the 
companies themselves obviously can't conduct foreign policy; 
they need the assistance of the U.S. Government. But, you know, 
one of the questions that has been widely debated this past 
year is whether, when we negotiate our trade agreements, we 
should be pushing for this principle, that we want to protect 
user-generated content, because, you know, the ability that we 
all have to post our things on public forums is derivative of 
Section 230 in, you know, protecting the platform from 
liability for that. And liability will be a reason that they 
won't host our speech, and we won't have that avenue if we take 
Section 230 protections away.
    So, should we try and put this in our trade agreements? I 
believe we should. But, you know, people that are concerned 
about, you know, some of the issues that we have here in the 
United States, which they don't have in other countries because 
they don't have any freedom of speech, in many cases, or it's, 
you know, deeply suppressed because of the government's 
exercise of its regulatory control over social media and the 
internet itself. So, they've taken those concerns that we have 
here in America, which I think we can work out and use that as 
reasons, and not put--the broad principles into our trade 
agreement.
    So I think number one, use our trade leverage and use our 
diplomacy, and put the Federal Government's, you know, foreign 
policymaking as the wind at our back so that our--platforms, 
you know, can----
    Senator Gardner. Thanks.
    Mr. Cox.--and so that the Internet can be visible, 
globally, and people can have access to more information around 
the world.
    Senator Gardner. Thanks.
    Senator Thune. Thank you, Senator Gardner.
    Next up is Senator Peters.

                STATEMENT OF HON. GARY PETERS, 
                   U.S. SENATOR FROM MICHIGAN

    Senator Peters. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, for this 
hearing.
    And, to each of the witnesses, appreciate your testimony 
today.
    I--Mr. Sylvain, the first question I have is for you. 
African Americans make up a little less than 13 percent of the 
United States population, but accounted for over 38 percent of 
U.S.-focused ads purchased by the Russian Internet Research 
Agency, and almost half of the user links. The social media 
accounts generally built a following by first posing as being 
African-American-operated, and by paying for ads that social 
media companies then distributed largely to African--or to 
African-American users. And near election day, the accounts 
urged African Americans to, quote, ``boycott the election.''
    So, my question to you, sir, is--African Americans make up 
14 percent of the population in Michigan. What recommendation 
do you have to prevent these targeted ads from disenfranchising 
voters? And what kind of oversight mechanisms could Congress 
possibly implement?
    Mr. Sylvain. This is one issue that I find extremely 
difficult to wrestle with and think about. I do think that 
Twitter and Facebook have put a good step forward insofar as 
they have asserted that disinformation in regards to elections 
is the sort of thing that they were going to try to be 
proactive about.
    You're asking whether or not Congress can do more. In my--
and consistent with my testimony, I wonder whether there is a 
mechanism that Congress can undertake, apart from what Section 
230 reform, as set out in the PACT Act, would do.
    Let me just speak about the PACT Act. I talked, a moment 
ago, about the possibility for civil enforcement. I--you know, 
I--again, I'm not an election expert, but my sense is that the 
sort as content that you're describing is fully inconsistent 
with public law in the context of elections, and so there might 
be some opportunity for intervention by an agency in that 
setting.
    But, the--you know, the other way I think about this--and 
this is an indirect question--in a way--indirect way of 
answering your question--I think that the big social media 
companies, the ones through which a lot of this content has 
been distributed, and also through WhatsApp, by the way, which 
is even more difficult to track, is pursuant to an interest in 
maximizing user engagement, and in spite of whatever the 
content is. And sometimes there's a kind of disregard for the 
content until an alarm bell is rung. And I think part of the 
reason that the content--that misleading information about 
elections could flow to African Americans, whomever, in 
election years, is because, in the first instance, it's a--it's 
drawing attention, apart from whether it's disinformation. So, 
the arguments I've made is that you--that companies might be 
more alert to their social obligation if they are already 
attuned to the obligation to attend to law. So, this is the 
indirect answer. The salutary effect of imposing obligations on 
companies to attend to law is to attend to things like election 
tampering through social media.
    Senator Peters. Well, thank you.
    Congressman Cox, you noted that the ideal way to screen 
wanted information from unwanted information is not for the 
government to regulate that flow, but rather for each 
individual user to have, basically, the greatest possible 
control over what they actually receive. Right now, as you 
know, private companies have significant control over screening 
what an individual sees or does not see through their 
algorithms.
    Question for you is, What are your thoughts on providing, 
perhaps, individual users with algorithm options that they can 
take greater control over what is presented to them?
    Mr. Cox. Well, I think that sounds like a wonderful idea. I 
mean, the more tools that we have as users of the Internet, all 
of us, to customize the content that we receive, the better 
that's going to be, from our perspective, for sure. You know, 
whether or not those tools will be, you know, freely available, 
whether they'll be expensive and we'll have to buy them, I 
don't know, but I'm all for it. I hope that, increasingly, such 
tools are available. As you know, you know, going back to the 
original law, that hope is expressed as one of the reasons that 
we adopt a law is to make sure that we have, you know, 
continued technological development, that regulation doesn't 
stifle it, and so on.
    But, just last, I would say that, insofar as, you know, 
parsing who should be in charge of deciding, you know, what's 
on the Internet, you know, only if we're talking about material 
that is legally acceptable in the first place, you know, does 
it then become the primary responsibility of the Internet user 
to determine whether he, she, or it wants that, you know, on 
their computer and in their premises. But, if it's illegal 
material per se, then that's the government's business, and it 
should be the platform's business to be concerned with that, as 
well. And so, we want to get as much of that off of those--the 
servers in the first place.
    Senator Peters. Great, thank you.
    Mr. Sylvain. Senator Peters, do you mind if I jump in one 
last--for one last point?
    Senator Peters. Yes, please.
    Mr. Sylvain. I know your time's up.
    Just real quickly. I mean, as Representative Cox was 
talking, it struck me that there is another specific tool that 
we haven't yet raised or discussed but that, I admit, is more 
controversial, and that is looking at targeted advertising. And 
maybe there's a way to think about restrictions in targeted 
advertising in the context of politics and elections. This--it 
is, in many ways, probably a--it's a constitutionally thorny 
question, but it's--because we already have rules against 
electioneering that are addressed to speech, I--you know, for 
example, what you can do outside of a voting station--I wonder 
whether that's another possibility.
    Senator Peters. Great.
    Senator Thune. Thank you, Senator Peters.
    Senator Cruz.

                  STATEMENT OF HON. TED CRUZ, 
                    U.S. SENATOR FROM TEXAS

    Senator Cruz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Thank you, to each of the witnesses, for being here today 
on this important topic.
    Representative Cox, let me start with you. Thank you for 
your long service and for your friendship. You and I have had 
interesting and substantive conversations on this specific 
topic of Section 230 and speech online. And I appreciate your 
expertise.
    When you were part of drafting Section 230, it was 1996. It 
was a long time ago. And, as you stated in your testimony, the 
Internet looked dramatically different than it does today. At 
the time Section 230 was written, there were roughly 20 million 
American adults who had access to the Internet, which compares 
now to more than 7-and-a-half billion globally, which is 
roughly 375 times as many people have access to the Internet as 
they did when Section 230 was drafted.
    In 1996, the principal means of access was dial-up, 
something, as you talk to young people today, that they don't 
even know what dial-up is. But, the speeds were so mind-
numbingly slow that it would take 10 minutes to download a 
single low-quality song, and anywhere from 3 to 5 days to 
download a single low-quality movie. The world has changed 
dramatically, and the money and power that has been 
concentrated in Big Tech is altogether different. In 1996, the 
Internet was still a nascent technology, and a technology that 
was very much being incubated from the ground up.
    Representative Cox, when you helped draft 230, was Google a 
company? Was Facebook a company? Was Twitter a company?
    Mr. Cox. No, not at all.
    Senator Cruz. So, none of them existed. There was no player 
that had the dominant monopoly position that we see, 
particularly at Google, in terms of controlling search, 
controlling access to videos, and being in a position to 
potentially manipulate search outcomes and silence views with 
which they disagree.
    In your opinion, should we be concerned about Big Tech 
censorship? Is it a problem that should trouble, not just 
Congress, but the American people?
    Mr. Cox. Well, thank you, Senator. And there's a lot to 
unpack, here.
    You know, first, you're looking back to 1996, and even 
1995, which was older still, and that's when Ron and I started 
on this. The concerns that we had at the time, I think are even 
more powerful in today's 21st-century context, because what we 
were concerned about was this essential distinction between the 
new technology, the Internet, and all that had preceded it, 
that government had found a way to regulate newspapers, 
television, and radio, where there was one group of content 
creation--the TV station, the radio station, the newspaper 
editorial staff--and then, you know, millions of passive 
recipients. With the Internet, you had millions--it was 
millions even back then, in the 1990s--of content creators who 
would then, you know, instantaneously broadcast to the whole 
world. What we could see, if the platforms were given the legal 
responsibility to monitor all of that content constantly and 
take legal responsibility for it, well then you couldn't have 
the Internet, you couldn't have realtime communication and--
among, you know, millions of people around the planet. So that 
today the fact that it is billions, and not millions, makes the 
problem all the more stark. And if you impose that liability on 
the platforms----
    Senator Cruz. So, Representative Cox, if I could ask if you 
could focus your answer on the question I asked, which is, 
Should the American people be troubled that a handful of 
Silicon Valley billionaires have monopoly power to silence 
speech they disagree with and amplify views that they agree 
with?
    Mr. Cox. Well, so I don't want to miss the point of your 
question, so may I answer this question within the framework of 
Section 230, or do you want me----
    Senator Cruz. I'm just asking if you agree it's a problem, 
not--I think the solution is complicated, but I'm just trying 
to start with, Do you agree this is a real problem?
    Mr. Cox. Yes, so I think it--first of all, if a platform is 
holding itself out as neutral, and, in fact, is not, and, in 
order to accomplish its objective of not being neutral, it is 
covering up the fact that it is, you know, doing things behind 
the scenes that it disclaims, then I think you have, you know, 
a violation of a lot of existing laws, and that it is 
absolutely something that we should be troubled about. Whether 
or not that's exactly what's happening--you know, this is 
something of a hypothetical question--but, whether or not 
that's exactly happening obviously is the fulcrum of what we do 
about it.
    Senator Cruz. So, Representative Cox, my time is expiring, 
here, but I want to make an observation. One document that I 
would encourage you to take a look at is a document that Google 
drafted and that was a major focus of a subcommittee hearing 
that I chaired some time ago. And the document is entitled 
``The Good Censor.'' Now, this is a Google document they wrote, 
in which they described how the old view of the Internet was 
what they described as laissez-faire free speech. It was the 
model you were talking about, of lots of content producers, let 
them speak, let's have a free-speech forum. And then they 
described the new model of Big Tech, which is what they called 
``European-style censorship,'' active censorship. You know, you 
talked about companies purporting to be neutral. According to 
Google's document, they listed four companies that had moved 
from laissez-faire free speech to European-style censorship. 
Those four companies were Google, YouTube, which Google owns, 
Facebook, and Twitter. By their own terms, they're not being 
neutral. They are actively censoring and, given the monopoly 
power they have over free speech, I view that as the single 
greatest threat to our democratic process that we have today.
    Thank you.
    Senator Thune. All right. Thank you, Senator Cruz.
    Senator Lee is up next. And I'm going to hand off to 
Senator Schatz and go vote.
    So, Senator Lee, recognized.

                  STATEMENT OF HON. MIKE LEE, 
                     U.S. SENATOR FROM UTAH

    Senator Lee. The United States light-touch regulatory 
approach to the Internet has been good. It's been good for the 
world economy, and for the American economy, in particular. 
It's produced, for us, an incredible success story of free 
speech and of innovation that really no other country in the 
world can boast.
    Section 230 is, I think, a significant part of that 
success. But, the Internet, like all other things, is not free 
of bad actors, bad actors who may be to try to use this 
resource for harmful and damaging, in some cases deceitful, 
purposes. But, in order to find the solution to those evils, we 
need to understand the problem.
    So, let me start by asking Mr. Kosseff and Ms. Banker, Are 
today's Internet problems--that is, political bias, illicit 
content, et cetera--caused by Section 230 immunity?
    Mr. Kosseff. I guess I'll go first. That's an excellent 
question. And I think it's hard, because I think the success of 
the Internet and the prevalence of the Internet has certainly 
amplified problems. I wouldn't say it's necessarily directly--
--
    Senator Lee. Not the cause.
    Mr. Kosseff.--Section 230.
    Senator Lee. Right.
    Mr. Kosseff. But, Section 230 being responsible for the 
success of the Internet in the United States, clearly the 
Internet has more of an impact, but I wouldn't say that it's 
Section 230 itself that's causing the--there are a number of 
different factors.
    Senator Lee. Ms. Banker, what do you think? Do you agree?
    Ms. Banker. Thank you. I'd actually say something perhaps a 
little bit different, which is, I think that, in terms of the 
types of harms we see on the Internet today and the voluntary 
measures that the Internet companies engage in to try and 
address those harms, we're actually enabled by Section 230. It 
is the protection that companies receive under the law for 
their voluntary efforts to try and enforce rules around 
illegality or just objectionable content that, you know, has, I 
think, put us in a better place today than we would have been 
without Section 230.
    Senator Lee. All right. That's good to know. Thank you.
    I want to talk a little bit about viewpoint discrimination 
among Big Tech, particularly among the big social media 
platforms. It is concerning. It's concerning on a number of 
levels, that you see what has become, I think, increasingly 
blatant viewpoint discrimination going on within these 
platforms. Now, to be sure, these platforms are not 
instrumentalities of the government. They're not government 
property. And yet, there is something concerning; in part, 
because, from my vantage point, centralization of power leads 
to centralization of government power. It makes it easier for 
government to take control of these levers, and it can cause 
other problems.
    Now, if I've been informed correctly, Donald Trump, Jr., 
the President's son, has, as of today, been suspended from 
Twitter. Why? Well, I'm told because he posted something 
containing content posted yesterday by a number of medical 
doctors who were speaking their mind as to what they view as 
the appropriate course of treatment for COVID-19. Now, I 
strongly suspect there might be an ideological angle, here, or 
it might have something to do with the fact that he's the 
President's son. Either way, this is concerning; in part, 
because these kinds of things tend to influence public policy 
and public debate.
    I don't think I've ever seen that kind of action taken by a 
social media platform when preferring one view on how to treat 
strep infections over another, or one view about how to treat 
cancer over another. So, that is concerning here.
    Nonetheless, I'm not so sure that Section 230 reform, or 
repeal, is necessarily the answer we're looking for. I think we 
need to find an answer to these questions. And I hope that that 
answer can be found within the market, itself, and not through 
government. But, I don't think 230 is the way to go.
    Now, Mr. Cox, in your 1995 floor speech, which Senator 
Gardner alluded to earlier on why Congress needed to adopt 
Section 230, you noted the relationship between adoption of 
Section 230, on the one hand, and avoidance of Federal 
regulation of the Internet. You argued that Section 230, quote, 
``will establish as the policy of the United States that we do 
not wish to have content regulation by the Federal Government 
of what is on the Internet, and that we don't want to have a 
Federal Computer Commission with any--with an army of 
bureaucrats regulating the Internet.'' So, I think you're on to 
something here, but I'd like to ask you. Since your 1995 speech 
in Congress, has Section 230 helped the United States avoid 
government regulation of the Internet, and of Internet content, 
and allowed for Americans to have access to many viewpoints at 
the click of a button?
    Mr. Cox. Umm, well the answer to that is yes, I think so. 
And, you know, with the benefit of hindsight, looking back over 
a quarter century of experience, not just in the United States 
but around the world, we can see the other model. It exists now 
in technicolor. So, take a look at the great firewall in China, 
take a look at the way that Russian media is organized, and 
take a look at Iran and Saudi Arabia, and then go down the list 
of the 38 countries that have been flagged by Freedom House as 
using social media for population control, and you can see, you 
know, the other model in its extreme. I don't know that, you 
know, the United States, with its, you know, democracy and, you 
know, for the most part, benign government looking after, you 
know, people's rights and so on, would have ended up there in 
any case, but if you're looking for the extreme dystopian 
alternative to the system that we did choose, it exists now 
today in the world. So----
    Senator Schatz [presiding]. Senator, if I--we'd like to 
move on. We're over time. We have a number of members to speak.
    Let's move on to Senator Baldwin.

               STATEMENT OF HON. TAMMY BALDWIN, 
                  U.S. SENATOR FROM WISCONSIN

    Senator Baldwin. Thank you.
    I really want to appreciate Chairman Thune and Ranking 
Member Schatz for having this hearing today.
    You know, it's important, and it's a thoughtful 
conversation, for the most part. And it goes without saying 
that the Internet of today looks very different from what 
existed when Section 230 was first authored and adopted in 
1996. But, as we've already heard from many of our witnesses, 
that is, at least in part, because of Section 20--230. So, I 
think it makes a lot of sense for us to take a hard look at 
this law in light of all of the changes we've seen. But, I also 
think we have to approach any potential reforms with 
thoughtfulness and humility.
    Section 230 allows online platforms to moderate the third-
party content that they host. Its Good Samaritan provision 
arguably encourages platforms to do so proactively. But, there 
has been a great deal of criticism of companies that have 
fallen short in their content moderation, whether by failing to 
promptly remove content that violates their own policies, 
lacking clarity and transparency about those policies and their 
enforcement, or appearing to apply those policies in a biased 
manner.
    There are a number of proposals, including the measure 
introduced by the Subcommittee Chair and Ranking Member, that 
would take steps to incentivize, encourage, or require better 
content moderation practices, including more transparency and 
due-process protections for those whose content is removed. And 
I think there's a lot of value in having platforms improve 
their content moderation efforts. But, I'm also concerned that 
a more proscriptive requirement or set of requirements could 
lead companies fearing litigation to overcompensate and push 
more content off their platforms.
    So, I'd like to get the whole panel's views. Is there an 
approach by which we can incentivize active, clear, and 
consistent content moderation without the negative consequences 
of less-open platforms and fewer new entrants into the Internet 
ecosystem?
    And let me begin with Professor Kosseff.
    Mr. Kosseff. Thanks so much for the question.
    And I think you really hit the nail on the head, in terms 
of what the challenge is, here. Because, I mean, the balance 
that Section 230 has at least attempted to strike is to give 
the platforms breathing room to develop their own content 
moderation and both not become liable for everything that's on 
their system because they're doing some moderation, and also 
not become liable if they're aware of something and make a 
judgment call to leave it up. Because content moderation at 
scale is incredibly difficult.
    So, I think that moving more toward transparency, rather 
than being proscriptive and saying, ``You must do this,'' 
because it's hard to get a one-size-fits-all approach for every 
platform, but giving the public a much better--much better 
insight into how the platforms are working, I think that's a 
very positive first step, and I think some of the platforms are 
really taking steps by themselves to move in that direction.
    Senator Baldwin. Mr. Sylvain? Professor?
    Mr. Sylvain. Yes, I actually agree with a lot of what 
Professor Kosseff just said. I think--and you hit the nail on 
the head, that the question of incentives matters, and we might 
have--this is a circumstance where, on the one hand, we do want 
to encourage moderation, but, the other hand, we may not want 
to chill too much speech. And so, on that principle, I think we 
can all agree.
    The only difficult, for me, is that the--as embodied in 
current law, that's just not good enough with regards to 
content that is harmful to historically disadvantaged groups. 
And so, I do think we need more than, you know, standardized 
conceptions of how to do moderation. I think the PACT Act sets 
out a really interesting transparency map and a--process for 
takedown. But, I do think we need more. And that's where law 
comes in.
    You know, there's a--I'm not the first person to observe 
that--you know, that law engenders public regarding, to take a 
language that Senator Schatz used at the outside, kind of 
public-interest, public-regarding norms. Law does that. And so, 
how do we formalize that, as a matter of course, rather than 
rely on companies' moderation standards? That's the tough 
question, and I think I err on the side of seeing more law play 
a role, here.
    Senator Baldwin. Congressman Cox? Good to see you, by the 
way.
    Mr. Cox. Well, one of--yes, thanks--one of the reasons that 
I am so enthusiastic about seeing more enforcement around 
content moderation policies, you know, getting the FTC 
involved, getting a consumer protection enforcement involved, 
is that I think Section 230 already provides plenty of space 
for companies to do things voluntarily; and the maddening thing 
is when they don't, anyway. So, when someone brings an 
egregious case of law violation to a platform, if the platform 
says, ``You know, we have no legal responsibility to do 
anything here,'' that's--that, to me, you know, is an outcome, 
you know, we should dearly wish to avoid. And so, how about 
looking to see whether that platform ever promised that that 
kind of illegal stuff was not going to be allowed? And if they 
said, ``We take these sorts of things down,'' and don't, then I 
think you've got, you know, plenty of grounds for enforcement.
    But, more than, you know, a Section 230 all by itself is 
necessary, here. There's got to be, you know, some backbone 
provided to the very sensible steps that I think common sense 
suggests that, you know, platforms should be taking. And most 
do, to their credit. But, the cases where they don't, you know, 
immediately reach our attention. And when I was in Congress, as 
you all still are, you know, the nice thing was, I'd pick up a 
newspaper, and if there's an outrage, and say, ``Ought to be 
law,'' then, you know, we'd go fix it.
    We have laws that I think are even being used that we can 
apply to this situation, because there are promises being made, 
and they extend even sometimes to political neutrality and so 
on, as Senator Cruz was mentioning. When those promises are 
violated, the courts have held that they can be enforced.
    Senator Schatz. Senator Blackburn.

              STATEMENT OF HON. MARSHA BLACKBURN, 
                  U.S. SENATOR FROM TENNESSEE

    Senator Blackburn. Thank you so much.
    And, Mr. Cox, welcome over to the Senate side.
    Mr. Cox. Yes.
    Senator Blackburn. It is good to see you.
    You and I have talked about Section 230 for years. And, as 
you were working on it in the mid-'90s, of course, I was in 
Tennessee and chairing the Tennessee Film Entertainment Music 
Commission and watching closely what you all were doing here. 
And, of course, through this time, the Internet has grown.
    I think that in 2018, when we did FOSTA and SESTA, and I 
was in the House and chairing Coms and Tech, we were pretty 
much looking at the fact that there were reforms that were 
needed, there were things that needed to be done, updates that 
needed to be given. And our concern is, you have some of our 
social media companies that have grown to the point that they 
function, in the words of Facebook's founder, more like a 
government. And they ought not to be making those decisions as 
to prioritization of content or availability of content on 
their sites.
    So, let me ask you this. And raise your hands. As you look 
at post-230 cases, are there any of those that any of you 
panelists would say have been wrongly decided?
    Mr. Cox. Well, I will jump in, if I may. Oh. Raise my hand.
    Senator Blackburn. OK. Go ahead.
    Mr. Cox. Yes, in my written testimony, I laid out, in some 
detail, how I think the First Circuit got it wrong in the 
BackPage litigation. The First Circuit, at least at the 
District Court level, subsequently in 2018 rectified its 
mistake and interpreted Section 230 correctly, I think, as 
against the pleadings that it was looking at in that case.
    Senator Blackburn. All right.
    Professor Kosseff?
    Mr. Kosseff. So, Congressman Cox took my answer that I 
think that case actually pointed more toward the discovery 
problem that we've discussed earlier, the lack of the ability 
to get discovery in extraordinary cases on whether the platform 
contributed to the content.
    Senator Blackburn. OK.
    And let me ask--and I'll start with you, Professor Kosseff, 
since your mic is open--as we look at the statute--of course, 
Congressman Cox helped to author that statute--do you believe 
that it is time, and that it is actually necessary, for us to 
revisit and to reform this statute based on concerns that are 
in the marketplace now?
    Mr. Kosseff. I think revisit, in terms of gathering better 
facts--as I said earlier, having a commission that gathers 
facts about, for example, what's possible with content 
moderation at such a large scale. I don't think we're at the 
point of being able to reform, because we have so many 
competing viewpoints about what platforms should be doing on 
top of what we could require them to do because of the First 
Amendment and other requirements. So, I think Section 230 is so 
important that we really have a duty to always look at how it's 
working, but I think right now we really need to be gathering 
more facts.
    Senator Blackburn. OK.
    Congressman Cox?
    Mr. Cox. Yes, I agree with that. I think the real challenge 
is figuring out what's doable in the real world. When I look at 
some of the legislation that's been introduced, such as the 
EARN IT Act, you know, which contains, you know, 16 separate 
categories of new, you know, regulatory requirements that are 
going to apply to websites, you know, these websites are all 
very different. They're not all Facebook. They're not even in 
that business. They're not all social media companies. And 
there are big differences between, you know, Twitter and 
Google, even at the Big Tech level. So, you know, what's 
doable, and what's going to, you know, on the other hand, you 
know, put at risk the availability of the user-generated 
content that we all rely on? And I think that, you know, we 
need to be careful of doing things like the EARN IT Act does, 
which is to say, well, we're----
    Senator Blackburn. OK. Let me ask you----
    Mr. Cox.--we're just not going to create a commission such 
as Professor Kosseff suggests, but we're going to give that 
commission legal authority that Congress won't even have an 
opportunity to check on, and it won't be something to 
Administrative Procedure Act public input or anything else. 
It'll just happen. So, I think we need a little more humility 
than that.
    Senator Blackburn. Should it be left with the FTC?
    Mr. Cox. Well, I think the FTC has a role. But, as I said, 
I think the FTC can do a lot of enforcement around false 
advertising, around, you know, the consumer abuses that have 
been identified. But, I think, you know, there are a lot of 
different laws and law enforcement levels, not just the Federal 
Government, but States, as well, can be our allies here.
    Senator Blackburn. OK. My time has expired, so I will yield 
back, but I'm going to send to each of you a question on what 
you think we should do so that we're protecting free speech 
online and we are still making certain that the social media 
outlets do not practice censorship or prioritization.
    Thank you so much.
    Yield back.
    Senator Schatz. Senator Tester.

                 STATEMENT OF HON. JON TESTER, 
                   U.S. SENATOR FROM MONTANA

    Senator Tester. Yes, I want to start by thanking you, 
Senator Schatz and Senator Thune, for your good work on this 
issue.
    And I want to express my appreciation to everybody's who's 
testified here during this hearing.
    I want to shift the conversation a little bit, at least I 
don't think it has been here. I had to get off for about a half 
hour. But, when a broadcast station, whether it be TV or radio, 
hears false or misleading advertising, they can be held 
accountable by the FCC or a court of law. However, I don't see 
the same consequences for Internet platforms.
    So, I have two questions. Number one, Is this right? Is 
this the way it should be? Is this the way it was intended when 
you wrote it up, Congressman Cox? And, number two, How did we 
get here? How did we get to this point?
    And I'll start with you. I'd like to have everybody address 
it, but I'll start with you, Congressman Cox.
    Mr. Cox. Yes. Thank you, Senator.
    The challenge that this poses is only matched by its 
importance. I think it's--important for us to get it right, 
because this goes to fundamental operation of our democracy.
    The difference--there are big differences between the radio 
and TV and newspaper paradigm, and the Internet. And that's 
what creates the disparity, because the essential functioning 
of the Internet is based on not just, you know, 10 or 50 or 
even 100 advertisers coming to the TV station, saying, ``Here's 
our ad. You know, check it out and put it on the air.'' 
Instead, it's millions of people, or billions of people, around 
the world, because it's a planetary potential user base. And 
the question is, Is it reasonable for the law to presume that 
the platform has the opportunity to review all of this 
material? And, if they were to have the obligation to review 
all of it, is it even conceivable that that could be done in 
realtime? And, if not, are we willing to say that----
    Senator Tester. Yes.
    Mr. Cox.--the regulation can do away with that essential 
aspect of the Internet, which is realtime communication----
    Senator Tester. The point is, though, Congressman, on paid 
advertising--in paid advertising, do you believe that they have 
an obligation to review that, just as TV and radio and 
newspaper do?
    Mr. Cox. Yes, well, and this may be an area where the 
existing rules could reasonably apply, because it is reasonable 
to expect that a company, a platform, has the opportunity to 
review its paid advertising before putting it up. You know, 
that may or may not be the case, depending on the business 
model. But, if that's the way it actually operates--it's why, 
you know, the real-world aspects of this are so important--then 
I think the way at least 230 was conceived, you're not risking 
an unreasonable burden on the platform that would cause it to 
dump user-generated content all together.
    Senator Tester. Mr. Sylvain, could you respond to that, 
also? I'd love to get your perspective as to, when it comes to 
paid advertising, should the same rules apply to the Internet 
platforms as does the TV, radio, and newspaper?
    Mr. Sylvain. Thank you for the question, Senator Tester.
    Senator Tester. I'm talking about from an information 
standpoint----
    Mr. Sylvain. Yes.
    Senator Tester.--being misleading.
    Mr. Sylvain. Yes. I do think so. And I'd like to start by 
getting to your second question first: How did we get here? The 
business model on which a lot of the most prominent 
intermediaries rely really is focused on maximizing or 
optimizing user engagement. And often that is at the expense of 
veracity. In some cases, that's OK. But, there are certain 
circumstances where lies and misleading and information and 
disinformation are costly for the operation of democracy. And 
our electoral system is one of them. So, we have a--the 
prevailing business model accelerates the distribution of 
provocative content, because it's consistent with the interest 
of engaging users. And often this is the kind of content that 
might misdirect people with regards to our political system.
    So, that's how I think we've gotten here. And so, I'm more 
alarmed--and I think many members have already expressed in 
this hearing--about disinformation online, so much so that I do 
think this is an urgent opportunity to align electoral law with 
what we see in other communications platforms.
    Senator Tester. Thank you.
    --you've only got about 20 seconds. Could you respond, to 
the best of your ability, quickly?
    Ms. Banker. Yes, I'll be quick.
    I think the platforms understand that, with regard to 
advertising and its importance, that they have stricter 
policies and heightened enforcement. But, I just--I want to add 
a caution, too, about the tremendous benefit that the new ad 
ecosystem has had for small businesses, because it has, 
essentially, lowered costs so that businesses that previously 
could not have afforded to advertise are now able to. And, as a 
former restaurant owner, I can tell you that, for small 
businesses that are cash-strapped, the ability to, like, really 
target advertising to a key demographic, and be able to do that 
quickly and easily, is a huge benefit. So, we'd want to make 
sure that, if any changes are made, that, you know, the costs 
don't end up again making advertising out of the reach for 
critical small businesses.
    Senator Tester. Thank you all.
    And thank you, Chairman Schatz.
    Staffer. Senator Rosen, you're next.

                STATEMENT OF HON. JACKY ROSEN, 
                    U.S. SENATOR FROM NEVADA

    Senator Rosen. Thank you so much. Thank you, Chairman 
Shune, Ranking Member--Thune--Ranking Member Schatz.
    Thank you, to all the witnesses, for being here today, and 
your work in this area.
    I'd like to speak a little bit about the bias in 
algorithms, and particularly in hate speech. Because one of the 
issues commonly raised regarding content moderation across 
multiple platforms is the presence of bias in artificial 
intelligence systems that are used to analyze the content. 
Decisions made through AI systems, including for content 
moderation, run the risk of further marginalizing and censoring 
groups that already face disproportionate prejudice and 
discrimination, both online and offline.
    As a former computer programmer and systems analyst who 
began my career when the field was even more dominated by men 
than it is today, I find this particularly troubling, because 
we've had previous hearings, where the witnesses--they've 
discussed the harms that algorithmic and AI systems potentially 
pose, including those from biased training data, algorithms, 
other system flaws that reproduce historical and existing 
social inequities. We see this when firms have tried to 
automate their hiring through machine learning, but then find 
that it merely perpetuates existing biases toward women.
    But, what I want to do, besides sexism, is to talk about 
another alarming issue that's happening today. Another 
challenging--another challenge that we're facing is hate 
speech. And so, when we use algorithms, and we deal 
specifically with the growing prevalence of anti-Semitism and 
the hate speech that's perpetuated online, this is bypassing 
content moderation, if such moderation exists on these sites at 
all.
    Last year, we saw the deadliest attack in the Jewish 
community in American history, when 11 people were killed at 
the Tree of Life Synagogue in Pittsburgh. Then, perhaps 
unsurprisingly, the shooter was linked to numerous anti-Semitic 
postings on fringe social network sites. This one, in 
particular, called Gab.
    So, for all the panelists, knowing that our online 
platforms are running into issues with content moderation 
specifically as regards to algorithms and AI systems, how 
should mainstream social networks interact with these fringe 
sites to stop the spread of manifestos, letters, other hateful 
writings?
    So, Congressman Cox, perhaps you can start; go then to Ms. 
Banker, Professor Sylvain, and then Professor Kosseff, please.
    Mr. Cox. Yes. So, there is so much work to be done in this 
area, because, despite the best efforts of even the most well-
motivated social media platforms, you know, we see examples 
where the algorithms don't work, sometimes the algorithms even 
serve up, you know, opportunities for bad people to, you know, 
get together. So, we've got to be constantly vigilant.
    We've talked about the legal incentives that exist. We've 
also talked about what more law enforcement could do in cases 
where platforms are actually interfering with the right 
outcomes. I think the most troubling challenge for writing law 
in this area is, you know, what about the great middle ground, 
where people are not--that have the platforms, they're not bad 
actors, they're trying to do the right thing, but it just 
doesn't amount to enough? And you suggested something that I 
think can be a way forward, and that is that there be 
collaboration among all the people with good hearts here to 
advance best practices and so on.
    The term ``best practices'' has been bandied about in some 
ways that are constructive, and others not. For example, in 
connection with the EARN IT app. But, I think the development 
of best practices in some ways, along the lines that Professor 
Kosseff has suggested, and then, you know, pushing those out to 
smaller websites, and so on, could be an absolutely 
constructive way to help.
    Senator Rosen. Appreciate that.
    Ms. Banker, can you speak to the process with, perhaps, 
algorithm and AI systems that we have to moderate content with?
    Ms. Banker. Absolutely. Algorithms are obviously incredibly 
important today. You know, they help us from everything to 
finding the fastest route to get to work to things like content 
moderation.
    The specific area you were asking about, you know, hate 
speech, is an area where--you know, algorithms alone are not 
going to be able to get us there. There's a critical role for 
human reviewers, and many of our companies, you know, use that, 
or rely on that, you know, primarily for these things where 
context is incredibly important.
    And I would also note that, in terms of industry 
collaboration, we've seen that work well in other contexts. You 
know, in 2006, you know, Internet companies came together to 
form a--kind of a coalition working together to share 
technology, know-how, and information to address the issue of 
child sexual abuse material. And, more recently, they've done 
something similar to address terrorism.
    So, I think there's precedent for that, and it's certainly 
an issue that the companies care about a great deal.
    Senator Rosen. Thank you.
    Professor Sylvain, quickly. I know my time's expired. 
Perhaps I'll leave you with the last word. Anything to add on 
AI and algorithms?
    Mr. Sylvain. Well, I would have loved for Professor Kosseff 
to jump in. I'll just say, quickly, that----
    Senator Rosen. Well, if Ranking Member Schatz----
    Mr. Sylvain.--align this point----
    Senator Rosen.--would let him, we'll be glad to, yes.
    Mr. Sylvain. Just one quick point, and that is, I would 
associate--I don't have anything to add with--on--based on what 
everyone else has said. I will say that the question of what is 
objectionably offensive, I very much appreciated Representative 
Cox statutory interpretation lesson earlier. You know, we think 
about what is within the subjective decisionmaking prerogatives 
of intermediaries. And I think this is squarely in it, for what 
it's worth.
    Senator Rosen. We'll give you, then, the last word, 
Professor Kosseff.
    Mr. Kosseff. Thanks so much.
    I agree with everything that's been said. I would just also 
add that there have been some significant failures, and we 
can't ignore that. But, Section 230 does provide the 
flexibility for experimentation with the best and most 
innovative procedures. We have to look at whether that's 
working. But, that is kind of the underpinning of Section 230.
    Senator Rosen. Thank you. I appreciate y'all being here 
today.
    Senator Thune [presiding]. Thank you, Senator Rosen.
    We're about ready to wind up, here, guys, so thanks for 
your indulgence and your patience, and even for, while I was 
off voting, since we have so many people who are appearing 
virtually, remotely, including members of the Committee, 
sometimes it's hard to cover the gaps when we've got votes 
going on, so I understand staff had to step in. So, thank you 
for very ably picking up the slack here.
    I'm going to ask just, if I might, perhaps one question, 
sort of close it out, and then we'll wrap things up.
    But, Representative Cox, Jeff Kosseff notes, in his 
prepared testimony, that CDA 230 has sometimes shielded 
platforms from plaintiffs who've suffered serious harms, and 
that, while Section 230 does not block a plaintiff from suing 
the person who created the harmful content, there are a number 
of reasons why that might be impractical, including the 
inability to track the person down or fear of retaliation.
    And one very recent example is the case of Force v. 
Facebook. And, in that case, the Estate of Taylor Force, who 
was killed in a Hamas terrorist attack in Tel Aviv, alleged 
that Facebook's algorithm provided the Hamas terrorist group 
with the means to find each other and to share content 
celebrating terrorist attacks. The Federal Court shielded 
Facebook from liability, on the basis of Section 230.
    So, the question is, How should Congress deal with this 
particular scenario, where a plaintiff, who has unquestionably 
been harmed, is unable to seek justice?
    Representative Cox.
    Mr. Cox. Yes, thank you.
    You know, that was a very tough case that you mentioned. 
It's an excellent example of the kinds of novel questions that 
the courts are going to face increasingly as technology, and, 
in particular, artificial intelligence, is going to play a 
greater role, not just in social media, but the--you know, 
their overall exploitation of data on the Internet.
    This case came out of the Second Circuit, which I noted in 
my written testimony has followed the national trend of 
applying the Ninth Circuit's rule in Roommates.com, which I 
credit for, you know, really taking us a great step forward in 
the development of the common law under Section 230. I think 
Roommates.com got it right, particularly when the Ninth Circuit 
considered that case en banc. In that case, the court held that 
a website was not entitled to protection from liability under 
Section 230 because it contributed content that was at issue in 
the case. And an important part of that holding was that the 
automated features of the website that were written into the 
code, as opposed to any direct human involvement, were 
themselves enough to constitute content development under 
subsection (f)(3) of Section 230.
    In the Second Circuit case that I noted in my testimony--
that was FTC against LeadClick Media--the court followed the 
Ninth Circuit precedent, Roommates, and denied Section 230 
immunity for the Internet marketer by deeming it a content 
developer, even though it didn't create the illegal content at 
issue; it merely provided advice to those who did create the 
content. That was deemed enough.
    So, the fact that the same Second Circuit Court of Appeals 
reached the opposite result in the Force case shows how 
difficult that decision was, and how difficult it must have 
been, you know, on the facts. The plaintiffs argued that 
Facebook's algorithms had introduced terrorists to one another, 
and then they would have had the further burden of proving that 
Facebook was a knowing conspirator with the terrorists. That's 
what the Federal statute--it's a similar statute, 18 U.S.C. 
2333--requires, or that Facebook, you know, knowingly 
participated in that situation. The Court seemed not to be 
persuaded that those facts had been adequately pleaded. But, 
they hung their hat on Section 230, as you point out. The facts 
alleged in the complaint seemed to make it appear that this was 
all the work of algorithms and the people at Facebook didn't 
themselves know that this happened, though they certainly found 
out about it eventually.
    These are the kinds of cases involving the work of 
algorithms that I think are going to become more frequent. And 
so, in the future, it won't be enough, I think, to say that 
people didn't know that the algorithm did it. We were talking 
about this earlier. I think as AI takes over more and more 
responsibility for what we see on the Internet, the law is 
going to have to go one way or the other. Unless the people who 
write the algorithms are going to be responsible for what the 
algorithms do, everybody's quickly going to realize that that 
will be the easiest way to avoid any liability at all.
    Whether it is possible to write a statute that cleanly 
parses when human knowledge is necessary, on the one hand, and 
when the work of an algorithm will be deemed to be the work of 
a human who could be held liable, on the other hand, that's a 
tough question. I think, in the medium- to short-run, this is 
going to be left for the courts to continue to sort out. And my 
hunch is that, as they've done in the Second Circuit, in the 
main, and the Ninth Circuit and elsewhere, that they're going 
to continue to look hard to find ways to ensure that wrongs 
don't go without remedies.
    Mr. Sylvain. Can I answer your question, Senator Thune, 
about the Force case?
    Senator Thune. Yes.
    Mr. Sylvain. So, if I had more space in the 5 minutes, I 
was going to talk about the Force case, for a couple of reasons 
I had already mentioned. It's a really interesting case out of 
the Second Circuit, for reasons Representative Cox mentions. 
But, I think it's no less interesting because of Chief Judge 
Katzmann's concurring opinion, in which he recognizes that the 
reasoning on which the majority of the panel bases its 
evaluation of whether or not Facebook should be subject to some 
liability in connection with the material support of terrorism 
because of recommendation algorithms, he doesn't agree with the 
conclusion, and he says that it's an invitation to Congress, an 
explicit invitation to Congress, to redress the emergent 
realities of automated decisionmaking systems for online 
intermediaries. Because, for him, he's not sure, as a matter of 
the way they're pled, as I think Representative Cox just said, 
that plaintiffs would have won, but this is a question that 
should have been resolved by the District Court after discovery 
had been gathered, to find out how deeply involved the 
recommendation algorithm was in the process. And I completely 
agree with Chief Judge Katzmann's approach to this.
    I urge the members to look at the concurrence and think 
about ways of thinking about, you know, amending the statute. 
My impression is that the PACT Act does start this process, 
because, particularly in the context of complicated automated 
decisionmaking systems, regulators can be in a good position to 
evaluate consonance with public law.
    Senator Thune. Thank you, Mr. Sylvain.
    Well, we would welcome your ongoing thoughts and 
suggestions and input with respect to some of these, as you 
described, novel situations, where, you know, we obviously want 
to get to see justice served. And I think the challenge that we 
face in all this, as I mentioned earlier, is protecting 
consumers and making sure that platforms, companies, have the 
ability to continue to innovate, and give them room to 
maneuver, too, but in a way that ensures that consumers are 
protected.
    So, that's a balance that we're trying to strike. I think 
the bill--as I said before, we've put a lot of thought and 
deliberation into trying to come up with a discrete set of 
solutions that we think get at some of these issues, but there 
are certainly exceptions, which will probably have to be, at 
some point, addressed, too, simply because of the continuing 
evolution of, as you all have pointed out, AI and algorithms 
and all these other ways now in which materials are being 
curated and made available to consumers.
    So, we'll continue this discussion. I appreciate all of you 
contributing to it. Thank you.
    And we will ask that members will have some time, a couple 
of weeks, to submit written questions for the record, and we 
would ask all of you, upon receipt of those questions, if you 
could submit your answers to the Committee as soon as possible. 
It would be greatly appreciated.
    I would also like to submit a letter for the record from 
CCIA, EPIC, and OTIA. And those will be included in the hearing 
record, without objection.
    [The information referred to follows:]

    
    
    
    

    Senator Thune. So, thank you all very much. I think this 
was very constructive and helpful, and it certainly will inform 
our decisions as we figure out how to proceed here. And I hope 
that we can proceed. I do believe it's time, and I think there 
are a lot of good ideas out there that we can include in a 
potential solution.
    So, thank you all very much.
    This hearing is adjourned.
    [Whereupon, at 12:42 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

                            A P P E N D I X

Response to Written Question Submitted by Hon. Shelley Moore Capito to 
                              Jeff Kosseff
    Are you aware of any instance where an interactive computer service 
has profited from illegal activity online? If so, which services? What 
have they done to remedy these instances?
    Answer. My response is only my personal view, as a Section 230 
scholar, and does not represent the views of the Naval Academy, 
Department of Navy, Department of Defense, or any other party.
    Online crime is a serious problem. Just as in the offline world, 
illegal activity can and does occur in cyberspace. For instance, the 
U.S. Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations concluded in a 
January 2017 report that online classified advertising site 
Backpage.com ``knows that advertisers use its site extensively for 
child sex trafficking, but the company has often refused to act swiftly 
in response to complaints about particular underage users--preferring 
in some cases to interpret these complaints as the tactics of a 
competing escort.'' \1\ The U.S. Court of Appeals for the First Circuit 
ruled in 2016 that Section 230 barred civil claims against Backpage.com 
by victims who were trafficked on the site, causing Congress in 2018 to 
amend Section 230 to allow certain civil claims and state criminal 
enforcement.\2\ It is important to note, however, that Section 230 
always has had an exception for the enforcement of Federal criminal 
law,\3\ allowing the Justice Department to seize Backpage.com a few 
days before the Section 230 amendment was signed into law.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ United States Senate, Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, 
Committee on Homeland Security and Government Affairs, Backpage.com's 
Knowing Facilitation of Online Sex Trafficking (Jan. 9, 2017) at 3.
    \2\ Doe No. 1 v. Backpage. com, LLC, 817 F. 3d 12 (1st Cir. 2016).
    \3\ 47 U.S.C. Sec. 230(e)(1).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Many other online crimes also pose a constant challenge for law 
enforcement. Among the most serious is the distribution of child sex 
abuse material. Online platforms must file reports if they obtain 
actual knowledge of apparent violations of child sex abuse material 
laws.\4\ The service providers are not legally required to monitor for 
child sex abuse material,\5\ and such a requirement could raise Fourth 
Amendment concerns.\6\ Nonetheless, many platforms voluntarily use 
technology such as PhotoDNA to scan for illegal content. The challenge 
for all of us who are concerned about online crime is to encourage the 
development and deployment of such technologies without disturbing the 
very delicate Fourth Amendment balance that allows these systems to 
detect online crime.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \4\ 18 U.S.C. Sec. 2258A.
    \5\ 18 U.S.C. Sec. 2258A(f).
    \6\ See United States v. Ackerman, 831 F.3d 1292 (10th Cir. 2016).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 ______
                                 
     Response to Written Question Submitted by Hon. Rick Scott to 
                              Jeff Kosseff
    Mr. Kosseff, do you think social media platforms, like Twitter or 
Facebook, should be able to restrict free speech and expression online 
to a greater extent than our First Amendment? And if so, why should 
they benefit from Section 230s legal immunity provision that was 
intended to promote free speech online?
    Answer. My response is only my personal view, as a Section 230 
scholar, and does not represent the views of the Naval Academy, 
Department of Navy, Department of Defense, or any other party.
    Yes. Some content, such as hate speech, is constitutionally 
protected yet quite harmful. Online platforms should be able to protect 
their users from such harm. Prohibiting a platform from engaging in 
certain forms of moderation could raise independent First Amendment 
concerns, as would tying a government benefit such as liability 
protection to a certain form of moderation.
    One of Section 230s findings was that the ``Internet and other 
interactive computer services offer a forum for a true diversity of 
political discourse, unique opportunities for cultural development, and 
myriad avenues for intellectual activities,'' \7\ a recognition of the 
role that Section 230 could play in enabling online speech. Yet 
Congress also explicitly stated that Section 230 was intended to 
overturn a New York state trial court decision that suggested that a 
platform faces increased liability for all user content by engaging in 
some content moderation.\8\ In other words, Congress wanted platforms 
to determine how to moderate content in the manner that their users 
demanded. To that end, Section 230 assumes that if platforms fail to 
meet users' expectations (either by over-moderating or under-
moderating), users will seek other platforms.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \7\ 47 U.S.C. Sec. 230(a)(3).
    \8\ Stratton Oakmont v. Prodigy Service Co., 23 Media L. Rep. 1794 
(N.Y. Sup. Ct. May 24, 1995).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    It is fair to question whether the Internet created by Section 230 
works fairly when a handful of platforms have billions of users and 
control a great deal of online speech. Are other platforms available if 
users are unhappy with a company's moderation practices? Being 
suspended or banned from one of these platforms can have a dramatic 
impact on a person's ability to speak and, in some cases, earn a 
living. A suspension from Prodigy or CompuServe in 1996 simply would 
not have the same impact.
    I cannot say with any degree of certainty what impact a repeal of 
or significant amendment to Section 230 would have on moderation. It is 
unclear how courts would apply the common law and First Amendment 
protections for distributors of third-party content to modern 
platforms, as Section 230 has been on the books since 1996. Until we 
know the rules in a Section 230-free world, we do not know how 
platforms would respond. There is a chance that at least some platforms 
would reduce the avenues for user generated content, fearing increased 
liability, or they might increase their moderation and block more 
content that is on the margins. Conversely, platforms might engage in 
less moderation, fearing that any involvement might make them liable 
for all user content. It also is conceivable that only the largest 
platforms could survive in a world without Section 230, eliminating 
smaller competitors and further consolidating venues for online speech.

                                  

