
 - THE INVALIDATION OF THE EU-U.S. PRIVACY SHIELD AND THE FUTURE OF TRANSATLANTIC DATA FLOWS

[Senate Hearing 116-629]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]


                                                        S. Hrg. 116-629

                    THE INVALIDATION OF THE EU-U.S.
                     PRIVACY SHIELD AND THE FUTURE
                      OF TRANSATLANTIC DATA FLOWS

=======================================================================

                                 HEARING

                               BEFORE THE

                         COMMITTEE ON COMMERCE,
                      SCIENCE, AND TRANSPORTATION
                          UNITED STATES SENATE

                     ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

                             SECOND SESSION

                               __________

                            DECEMBER 9, 2020

                               __________

    Printed for the use of the Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
                             Transportation
                             
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]                             


                Available online: http://www.govinfo.gov
                
                               __________

                                
                    U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE                    
52-856 PDF                   WASHINGTON : 2023                    
          
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------     
               
                
       SENATE COMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, SCIENCE, AND TRANSPORTATION

                     ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

                             SECOND SESSION

                  ROGER WICKER, Mississippi, Chairman
JOHN THUNE, South Dakota             MARIA CANTWELL, Washington, 
ROY BLUNT, Missouri                      Ranking
TED CRUZ, Texas                      AMY KLOBUCHAR, Minnesota
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska                RICHARD BLUMENTHAL, Connecticut
JERRY MORAN, Kansas                  BRIAN SCHATZ, Hawaii
DAN SULLIVAN, Alaska                 EDWARD MARKEY, Massachusetts
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               TOM UDALL, New Mexico
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          GARY PETERS, Michigan
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
MIKE LEE, Utah                       TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
RON JOHNSON, Wisconsin               JON TESTER, Montana
TODD YOUNG, Indiana                  KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
RICK SCOTT, Florida                  JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
                       John Keast, Staff Director
                  Crystal Tully, Deputy Staff Director
                      Steven Wall, General Counsel
                 Kim Lipsky, Democratic Staff Director
              Chris Day, Democratic Deputy Staff Director
                      Renae Black, Senior Counsel
                           
                           C O N T E N T S

                              ----------                              
                                                                   Page
Hearing held on December 9, 2020.................................     1
Statement of Senator Wicker......................................     1
Statement of Senator Cantwell....................................     3
Statement of Senator Blackburn...................................    82
Statement of Senator Blumenthal..................................    84
Statement of Senator Thune.......................................    86
Statement of Senator Peters......................................    88
Statement of Senator Schatz......................................    91
Statement of Senator Scott.......................................    94
Statement of Senator Rosen.......................................    95

                               Witnesses

James M. Sullivan, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Services, 
  International Trade Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce     5
    Prepared statement...........................................     7
Hon. Noah Joshua Phillips, Commissioner, Federal Trade Commission    11
    Prepared statement...........................................    13
Victoria A. Espinel, President and Chief Executive Officer, BSA | 
  The Software Alliance..........................................    20
    Prepared statement...........................................    21
Peter Swire, Elizabeth and Tommy Holder Chair of Law and Ethics, 
  Scheller College of Business, Georgia Institute of Technology..    28
    Prepared statement...........................................    31
Prof. Neil M. Richards, Koch Distinguished Professor in Law; 
  Director, Cordell Institute for Policy in Medicine and Law, 
  Washington University in St. Louis.............................    70
    Prepared statement...........................................    71

                                Appendix

Letter dated December 9, 2020 to Hon. Roger Wicker and Hon. Maria 
  Cantwell from Ronald Newman, National Political Director, 
  National Political Advocacy Department; Kathleen Ruane, Senior 
  Legislative Counsel, National Political Advisory Department; 
  and Ashley Gorski, Senior Staff Attorney, National Security 
  Project........................................................    99
Response to written questions submitted by Hon. Amy Klobuchar to:
    Hon. Noah Joshua Phillips....................................   103
Response to written questions submitted to Prof. Neil M. Richards 
  by:
    Hon. Amy Klobuchar...........................................   104
    Hon. Kyrsten Sinema..........................................   105
    Hon. Brian Schatz............................................   107

 
                    THE INVALIDATION OF THE EU-U.S.
                     PRIVACY SHIELD AND THE FUTURE
                      OF TRANSATLANTIC DATA FLOWS

                              ----------                              


                      WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 9, 2020

                                       U.S. Senate,
        Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation,
                                                    Washington, DC.
    The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:02 a.m., in 
room SR-253, Russell Senate Office Building, Hon. Roger Wicker, 
Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
    Present: Senators Wicker [presiding], Thune [presiding], 
Blackburn, Scott, Cantwell, Blumenthal, Schatz, Peters, and 
Rosen.

            OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ROGER WICKER, 
                 U.S. SENATOR FROM MISSISSIPPI

    The Chairman. Good morning, and welcome to today's hearing 
on the ``Invalidation of the EU-U.S. Privacy Shield and the 
Future of Transatlantic Data Flows''. I extend a special 
welcome to our distinguished panel of witnesses and thank them 
for appearing today.
    Today we will hear from Mr. James Sullivan, Deputy 
Assistant Secretary for Services with the International Trade 
Administration at the Department of Commerce; the Honorable 
Noah Phillips, Commissioner at the Federal Trade Commission; 
Ms. Victoria Espinel, President and Chief Executive Officer at 
BSA; the Software Alliance, Mr. Peter Swire, who is the 
Elizabeth and Tommy Holder Chair of Law and Ethics at the 
Georgia Tech Scheller College of Business and Research Director 
at the Cross-Border Data Forum; and Mr. Neil Richards, Koch 
Distinguished Professor of Law at Washington University and St. 
Louis School of Law.
    And I assume Mr. Richards is appearing by video. I have 
been told that. That is great. Data is the lifeblood of the 
global digital economy. Free movement of data across national 
borders underpins trillions of dollars of international trade, 
commerce, and investment. Data serves as a catalyst for 
innovation, productivity, and economic growth, and helps 
promote U.S. competitiveness in technology leadership around 
the world. According to one estimate, digitally-enabled trade 
amounted to between $800 and $1,500 billion globally in 2019, 
and is projected to raise global GDP by over $3 trillion this 
year. To sustain digital trade and the free flow of data, 
governments have sought to eliminate trade barriers and 
safeguard the privacy and security of consumers' personal data, 
a top priority of this committee.
    Maintaining a shared commitment to protecting consumers' 
personal data has been particularly important to our trade 
relationship with Europe. In 2016, the United States and the 
European Union agreed to the Privacy Shield framework. This 
framework established a legal mechanism to provide for transfer 
of EU citizens' personal data to the United States in 
compliance with EU data protection laws. The establishment of 
the Privacy Shield was intended to ensure that over 5,000 small 
and medium sized businesses spanning several economic sectors 
in both the U.S. and EU could continue engaging in 
transatlantic digital commerce without disruption.
    Among other things, the Privacy Shield required 
participating organizations to give notice about their 
collection and use of the data of EU citizens, and give 
individuals the right to opt out of having their personal 
information disclosed to a third party. Organizations were also 
required to implement effective redress mechanisms for EU 
citizens to file complaints about how their data is used 
outside of the EU. And the United States was required to 
appoint an ombudsperson at the State Department to ensure 
complaints were properly investigated. The Privacy Shield 
included additional assurances that there would be clear 
conditions, limitations, and active oversight concerning 
Government access to EU citizens' personal data for National 
Security purposes. In July of this year, the European Court of 
Justice invalidated the Privacy Shield, and that is the reason 
we are here today, citing inadequate data protections in the 
U.S. based on our surveillance laws and an alleged lack of 
redress rights for EU citizens in the United States.
    Today's hearing is an opportunity to discuss what can be 
done to develop a durable and lasting data transfer framework 
between the United States and the EU that provides meaningful 
data protections to consumers, sustains free flow of 
information across the Atlantic, and encourages continued 
economic and strategic partnership with our European allies. A 
tall order, but an essential order. A solution begins with 
understanding the underlying issues that led to the 
invalidation of the Privacy Shield this summer. I hope our 
witnesses will discuss the merits of the Privacy Shield to 
redress rights for EU citizens and how U.S. intelligence 
practices compare to those of the EU member states.
    I also look forward to witnesses addressing how the 
invalidation of the Privacy Shield affects the viability of 
other data transfer mechanisms. To take one example, in a 
mechanism called Standard Contractual Clauses, exporters of EU 
citizens? data to the U.S. now have to carry out an assessment 
of whether U.S. law provides adequate protections. The EU's 
Data Protection Board recently issued guidance on how to comply 
with EU law while relying on standard contractual clauses to 
transfer data across the Atlantic. But in issuing this 
guidance, the EU Data Protection Board acknowledged that the 
implementation of these measures may still be insufficient to 
transfer data legally to the U.S. and other non-EU countries.
    With this in mind, I hope witnesses will discuss how U.S. 
businesses can confidently conduct transatlantic data transfers 
in compliance with EU laws as we continue bilateral 
negotiations to replace the Privacy Shield. I welcome the 
European Commission's commitment to continue working with the 
United States to ensure continuity of safe data flows in a 
manner that reflects the values we share as democratic 
societies. And I had a very productive and informative 
conversation with members of the European Commission just 
yesterday.
    Finally, a major priority of this committee has been 
strengthening consumer data privacy through the development of 
bipartisan Federal data privacy law. I look forward to 
witnesses discussing how a comprehensive data privacy law with 
strong enforcement and meaningful privacy and redress rights 
for consumers might be able to aid efforts to develop a 
successor data transfer framework between the United States and 
the EU.
    Having said that mouthful and gone 3 minutes over, I thank 
you for your participation and I turn to my dear friend and 
colleague, Ranking Member Cantwell, for her opening remarks.

               STATEMENT OF HON. MARIA CANTWELL, 
                  U.S. SENATOR FROM WASHINGTON

    Senator Cantwell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you 
for holding this hearing. Also, thank you for your leadership 
on the Helsinki Commission. I certainly appreciate your hard 
work in both of those roles and trying to solve and--resolve 
these issues between the United States and the European Union. 
So I also want to thank our colleagues, Senators Cardin and 
Shaheen, for also working on that Helsinki Commission and these 
important issues. The decision by the European Court of Justice 
earlier this summer makes it abundantly clear we need to have a 
new agreement between the United States and Europe to address 
the transatlantic data flow. It must be a top priority by the 
Biden Administration. We must ensure the continued free flow of 
commercial data between the United States and Europe.
    When I think about the Mexico Free Trade Agreement and 
getting the digital provisions in there, this is something that 
is now the norm. This is not an obscure thing. It is going to 
become more and more and more about trade and figuring out 
trade. Trade is digital. So a lot is at stake. The U.S. and EU 
digital trade is worth more than $300 billion annually, 
including more than $218 billion in U.S. exports to Europe. So 
a very important export issue. And every business that exports 
and imports, has a presence or investment in the U.S. and 
Europe will face difficulties if there are barriers to cross-
border data transfer. In all, more than $1 trillion in U.S.-
European trade is at risk.
    With the invalidation of the Privacy Shield Agreement, we 
now have lost the most straightforward legal tool for 
transferring data from the EU to the US. And this is a 
particular problem for small and medium sized businesses. It 
also puts some of our largest and more sophisticated companies 
at a disadvantage and cast doubt on the protection of their 
digital services and what they provide. Europe and the United 
States have had a long history of working together, and to 
address our global challenges and security issues at the same 
time, we must redouble those efforts.
    We must continue to work closely to defend our shared 
values for democracy and the rule of law. And I want to see the 
U.S. and Europe working together on these very important 
national concerns, trade and technology, so that we can 
continue to improve economic opportunities and avoid moves 
toward protectionism. We need to start by coming together on 
protecting data, but we also must increase bilateral 
cooperation on a broad digital agenda, 5G, 6G, a regulatory 
framework for artificial intelligence, autonomous vehicles, 
cybersecurity-disinformation standards. So I support the 
European proposal to create a US, European Technology Council 
for dialogue. Maybe the Commission, the Helsinki Commission and 
others can help on this.
    We can work together in a multilateral organizations like 
OECD and the G7 to confront the challenges from China and 
Russia so that we can more focus on what the standards are for 
the next generation of technology and to ensure for the proper 
protection of intellectual property. This must be our larger 
goal. If we fail to increase our cooperation on digital issues, 
our economy will suffer the consequences. The free flow of data 
between the United States and Europe is especially critical to 
5,000-plus tech companies in the State of Washington, which 
generate more than $2.8 billion in digital export. And so 
equally important here today are the privacy issues that we are 
still working on as a committee.
    These are important issues. So we don't want consumers left 
behind. We want them to have control over their personal, 
privacy data. We want, at the State and Federal level, to make 
sure that we have the right safeguards in place for consumers. 
So I guarantee you the United States and European citizenry are 
on the same page. These are the concerns that we all share, 
that the U.S. may have, at a Government level, a bulk 
collection of intelligence information that might violate those 
privacy rights. So we have to work hard to resolve this issue 
of the Privacy Shield and work hard on privacy legislation next 
year.
    So thank you, Mr. Chairman. I look forward to working with 
you in resolving the issues between us on our two bills, and 
certainly we have made progress. It is a very hard issue. But 
the digital world is not going away, so we have to not only 
pioneer it, but pioneer the laws and safeguards that go along 
with it. Thank you very much.
    The Chairman. And thank you for that very fine statement, 
Madam Ranking Member. And we now have an opportunity for 
opening statements by our distinguished panel. Prepared 
statements will be submitted and included in full in the record 
at this point, and we ask each witness to summarize in 5 
minutes or less.
    Let me also say, we have a vote--we have a series of three 
roll call votes at 11 a.m., and I think what we will do, 
Senator Cantwell, is just continue the hearing and we will ask 
members, two members of the Committee to preside while we go 
back and forth.
    Three, 15 minute votes, takes us well over an hour in the 
U.S. Senate. So we would be advised that that will not be a 
particularly steep hill for us to climb. Mr. Jim Sullivan, what 
do you have to tell us in 5 minutes? You bet, yes.

                STATEMENT OF JAMES M. SULLIVAN,

            DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR SERVICES,

              INTERNATIONAL TRADE ADMINISTRATION,

                  U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE

    Mr. Sullivan. Good morning, Chairman Wicker, Ranking Member 
Cantwell, distinguished members of the Committee. Thank you for 
the invitation to testify about the EU-U.S. Privacy Shield 
Framework and the recent Schrems II decision by the Court of 
Justice of the European Union. I am heartened by your 
bipartisanship on the importance of cross-border data flows. I 
appreciate the Committee's very active engagement on Privacy 
Shield and the five months since the court's ruling.
    As the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Services in the 
International Trade Administration, I oversee the Office of 
Digital Services Industries and the team responsible for U.S. 
Government, administration, and oversight of the Privacy Shield 
framework. During the 3-year period between July 2017 and July 
2020, the Privacy Shield team and I led three successful joint 
annual reviews of the functioning of the framework with our 
partners in the European Commission and European data 
protection authorities. We also facilitated a 125 percent 
increase in the number of Privacy Shield participants, from 
2,400 to 5,400 companies, that relied on the framework to 
conduct transatlantic trade.
    Our Office of Digital Services Industries has long 
advocated for policies that support the free flow of data 
across borders as essential to global commerce, and I welcome 
this opportunity to comment on the status of transatlantic data 
flows today. And with the growth in Internet connectivity and 
the accelerating digitization of the global economy, cross-
border data flows have become just as important to growing 
American jobs and competitiveness as U.S. trade in goods and 
services. Because the United States has been a preeminent 
innovator and early adopter of information and communications 
technology, our Nation occupies a singular leadership role in 
the digital economy today.
    With the July 16th decision in the Schrems II case, 
however, data transfers from one of our largest trading 
partners are now under serious threat. In addition to 
invalidating the European Commission's adequacy decision for 
the Privacy Shield framework, Schrems II decision has also 
called into question the reliability of other key mechanisms 
for moving personal data from Europe to the United States.
    That ability to transfer data, including personal data, 
seamlessly across borders generates enormous benefits for our 
Nation. It affords Americans greater opportunities and a better 
quality of life by allowing us all to interact with people in 
organizations anywhere in the world. It allows our businesses, 
no matter how large or small, to use the Internet to market and 
deliver their goods and services wherever data is allowed to 
flow. And with technologies like 5G, the Internet of Things, 
and AI, the next wave of digital innovation is already here and 
the ability to transfer data across borders is an essential 
driver of innovation, competitiveness, and economic growth.
    At this particular moment in history, moreover, 
international data flows enable the data sharing and 
collaborative research critical to understanding the COVID-19 
virus, to mitigating its spread, and to expediting the 
discovery and the development of treatments and vaccines. The 
United States and the European Union enjoy a $7.1 trillion 
economic relationship with $5.6 trillion in transatlantic trade 
annually. By some estimates, nearly $450 billion of this trade 
involves digital services.
    In truth, given the ongoing digitization of virtually every 
sector of our economy and the fact that transatlantic data 
flows are the highest in the world, far more of that $5.6 
trillion in trade is facilitated in some fashion by cross-
border transfers of data. Now, despite our shared recognition 
of the importance of privacy and data protection, the United 
States and the European Union do differ in our respective legal 
approaches. As a general matter, the United States has adopted 
a sectoral approach to privacy with Federal laws focused on 
protecting certain types of particularly sensitive data, such 
as financial or medical information.
    The European Union, by contrast, largely protects all 
personal data under a single set of rules set forth in one law, 
the General Data Protection Regulation, or GDPR. And it 
prohibits companies from transferring EU personal data outside 
Europe, except under special circumstances. Transfers are 
expressly permitted to a recipient in a third country, for 
example, if the European Commission has determined that the 
laws of that country provide an adequate level of data 
protection, which is essentially equivalent to that afforded 
under EU law. If there is no adequacy decision for a country, a 
company may still transfer EU personal data to a recipient in 
that country by using an EU-approved data transfer mechanism.
    As the European Commission has not made an adequacy 
decision for the United States, the primary transfer mechanisms 
used by U.S. companies have been standard contractual clauses, 
or SCCs, and until recently, Privacy Shield. Privacy Shield was 
negotiated as a successor to the 15 year old Safe Harbor 
Framework, which itself was invalidated by the EU Court of 
Justice in the 2015 Schrems I case in the wake of the Snowden 
disclosures. Finalized in July 2016, Privacy Shield created the 
ombudsperson mechanism at the State Department to investigate 
certain requests from EU individuals related to U.S. National 
Security access to their personal data. Because the privacy----
    The Chairman. Mr. Sullivan, we are going to put your whole 
statement into the record. If you could summarize in 30 more 
seconds so we can move along.
    Mr. Sullivan. Sure. As framed by the court, the central 
question in Schrems II was whether in view of U.S. law and 
practice regarding Government access to personal data for 
National Security purposes, Privacy Shield and SCCs provide 
sufficient safeguards to EU personal data transferred to the 
United States? Although the European Commission and several EU 
member states joined the U.S. Government in arguing that U.S. 
law and practice do, in fact, satisfy EU data protection 
standards, the court answered the question with respect to 
Privacy Shield with a definitive, no.
    And that ruling has created enormous uncertainties for U.S. 
companies and the transatlantic economy at a particularly 
precarious time. Effective immediately, the 5,400 Privacy 
Shield participants could no longer rely on the framework as a 
basis for transferring personal data. And because neither the 
court nor the European data protection authorities provided for 
any enforcement grace period, these companies were basically 
left with three choices: they could do nothing and risk huge 
fines for violating GDPR, they could withdraw from the European 
market altogether, or they could switch right away to other 
more expensive data transfer mechanisms----
    The Chairman. OK, we will take the rest of the statement 
for the record.
    Mr. Sullivan. Thank you.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Sullivan follows:]

Prepared Statement of James M. Sullivan, Deputy Assistant Secretary for 
   Services, International Trade Administration, U.S. Department of 
                                Commerce
1. INTRODUCTION
    Good morning, Chairman Wicker, Ranking Member Cantwell, and 
distinguished Members of the Committee.
    Thank you for the invitation to testify about the EU-U.S. Privacy 
Shield Framework and the recent Schrems II decision by the Court of 
Justice of the European Union. I am heartened by your bipartisanship on 
the importance of cross-border data flows and appreciate the 
Committee's active engagement on Privacy Shield in the five months 
since the Court's ruling.
    As the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Services in the International 
Trade Administration, I oversee the Office of Digital Services 
Industries and the team responsible for U.S. Government administration 
and oversight of the Privacy Shield Framework. During the three-year 
period between July 2017 and July 2020, the Privacy Shield Team and I 
led three successful joint annual reviews of the functioning of the 
Framework with the European Commission and European data protection 
authorities, and facilitated a 125 percent increase in the number of 
Privacy Shield participants--from 2,400 to 5,400 U.S. companies that 
relied on the Framework to conduct transatlantic trade.
    The International Trade Administration's Office of Digital Services 
Industries has long been focused on digital trade and data governance 
issues, advocating for policies that support the free flow of data 
across borders as essential to global commerce. As such, I welcome this 
opportunity to comment on the status of transatlantic data flows today.
    With the growth in Internet connectivity and accelerating 
digitization of the global economy, cross-border flows of data have 
become just as important to growing American jobs and global 
competitiveness as U.S. trade in goods and services. Because the United 
States has been a preeminent innovator and early adopter of information 
and communications technology, our Nation occupies a singular 
leadership role in the digital economy today.
    With the July 16, 2020 decision by the Court of Justice of the 
European Union in the Schrems II case, however, data transfers from one 
of the United States' largest trading partners are now under serious 
threat. In addition to invalidating the European Commission's adequacy 
decision for the EU-U.S. Privacy Shield Framework, the Schrems II 
decision has also called into question the reliability of the other key 
mechanisms for moving personal data from Europe to the United States.
    My testimony will first explore why transatlantic data flows are so 
important to the U.S. economy. I will then review briefly the differing 
regulatory approaches to data privacy in the United States and the 
European Union, and how we have managed to bridge those differences in 
the past through innovative frameworks like Privacy Shield. Finally, I 
will discuss the Schrems II decision, its implications for U.S. 
businesses, and the Administration's efforts to restore legal certainty 
around transatlantic data flows by negotiating mutually acceptable 
standards of data privacy through targeted enhancements to the Privacy 
Shield Framework.
    At the outset, I should note that I am limited as to what details I 
can share at this time with respect to discussions with the European 
Commission.
2. IMPORTANCE OF TRANSATLANTIC DATA FLOWS
    The ability to transfer data--including consumers' personal data--
seamlessly across borders generates enormous benefits for our citizens, 
our businesses, and our Nation.
    It affords Americans greater opportunities and a better quality of 
life--by allowing us all to interact with people and organizations 
anywhere in the world and access an ever-growing number of goods and 
services that can be tailored to our individual needs and preferences.
    It allows our businesses, no matter how large or small, to use the 
Internet to more easily market and deliver their ideas, goods and 
services--wherever data is allowed to flow. Today, solo entrepreneurs 
and small- and medium-sized enterprises can reach global markets--and 
the 4.5 billion people now connected to the Internet--with 
unprecedented ease. American businesses of all sizes in every industry 
rely on personal data to facilitate transactions; enhance efficiencies; 
reduce costs; generate new customer insights; improve the quality of 
products and services; prevent and mitigate fraud; and manage their 
international networks of employees, customers, and suppliers.
    With technologies like 5G, the Internet of Things, robotics, and 
artificial intelligence, the next wave of digital innovation is already 
here, and the ability to transfer data across borders--to and from 
Europe and other places in the world--is an essential driver of 
commercial competitiveness, economic growth, innovation, job creation, 
and wage growth worldwide. The economic benefits are clear not only for 
the United States but for Europe itself. At this particular moment in 
history, moreover, international data flows enable the data sharing and 
collaborative research critical to understanding the COVID-19 virus, 
mitigating its spread, and expediting the discovery and development of 
treatments and vaccines.
    The United States and the European Union enjoy a $7.1 trillion 
economic relationship--with $5.6 trillion in transatlantic trade 
annually. According to some estimates, nearly $450 billion of this 
trade involves digital services. In truth--given the ongoing 
digitization of virtually every industry sector and the fact that 
cross-border data flows between the U.S. and Europe are the highest in 
the world--far more of that overall $5.6 trillion in trade is 
facilitated in some way by cross-border transfers of data.
3. DIFFERENT APPROACHES TO DATA PRIVACY
    Despite our shared recognition of the importance of consumer 
privacy and data protection, the United States and the European Union 
differ in our respective legal approaches.
    As a general matter, the United States does not have one 
comprehensive data protection or privacy law. Privacy is regulated 
through a number of laws enacted at the Federal and state level. 
Federal laws often vary considerably in their purpose and scope. Many 
Federal laws impose data protection requirements tailored to specific 
sectors, such as finance, health, and communication. Several Federal 
laws focus on protecting certain types of particularly sensitive and 
at-risk consumer data. These include an individual's financial and 
medical information; children's online information; background 
investigations and ``consumer reports'' for credit or employment 
purposes; and certain other specific categories of data. All 50 states 
have also enacted legislation requiring private or governmental 
entities to notify individuals of security breaches of personally 
identifiable information.
    The European Union, by contrast, largely protects all personal data 
under a single set of rules set forth in one law--the General Data 
Protection Regulation or ``GDPR.''
    As a general matter, EU law also prohibits a company from 
transferring EU personal data outside Europe except under special 
circumstances.
    First, transfers are expressly permitted to a recipient in a third 
country if the European Commission has determined that the national 
laws of that country provide an ``adequate level of protection'' for 
personal data which is ``essentially equivalent'' to the level afforded 
under EU law. There are only 12 jurisdictions in the entire world that 
the European Commission currently considers to ensure an adequate level 
of protection: Andorra, Argentina, Canada, Faroe Islands, Guernsey, 
Israel, Isle of Man, Jersey, New Zealand, Switzerland, Uruguay, and 
Japan.
    And second, if there is no adequacy decision for a country, a 
company may still transfer EU personal data to a recipient in that 
country by using an EU-approved ``transfer mechanism'' that ensures 
sufficient data protection by the recipient. Standard Contractual 
Clauses or ``SCCs'' are the main transfer mechanism used by 90 percent 
of companies that transfer EU personal data internationally. Another 
option, Binding Corporate Rules or BCRs, is a set of legally 
enforceable internal policies for data transfers within a group of 
enterprises, typically large multinational organizations. Owing to a 
lengthy and expensive approval process, however, relatively few 
organizations--only about a hundred around the world--have adopted 
BCRs.
    As the European Commission has not made an adequacy decision for 
the United States as a whole, the primary EU-approved data transfer 
mechanisms used by U.S. companies have been SCCs and, until recently, 
the EU-U.S. Privacy Shield, which was a ``partial'' adequacy decision 
in that it only covered transfers to Privacy Shield-certified companies 
in the United States.
The EU-U.S. Privacy Shield Framework
    Privacy Shield was negotiated as a successor to the 15-year old 
Safe Harbor Framework. Under Safe Harbor, over 4,000 U.S. companies 
made legally enforceable promises that allowed for the transfer of EU 
personal data to the United States in compliance with EU law. In 2013, 
Austrian data privacy activist Max Schrems challenged Safe Harbor, and 
in 2015--spurred by Edward Snowden's unauthorized disclosures of 
national security information--the Court of Justice of the European 
Union invalidated the European Commission's adequacy decision that had 
underpinned the Framework since 2000.
    To address the Schrems I decision, and in anticipation of GDPR's 
implementation in 2018, the Department of Commerce and its interagency 
partners worked with the European Commission to develop and maintain a 
modernized and durable transatlantic data protection framework. After 
months of intense negotiations, the United States and the European 
Commission finalized the EU-U.S. Privacy Shield Framework in July 2016.
    Under the terms of the new Framework, the United States created the 
Privacy Shield Ombudsperson Mechanism at the State Department to 
investigate certain requests from EU individuals related to national 
security access to EU personal data transmitted to the United States. 
Because the Privacy Shield Ombudsperson Mechanism applied to EU 
personal data transmitted to the United States pursuant to any transfer 
tool approved under EU law (including SCCs and BCRs), Privacy Shield 
became a key enabler of all transfers of EU personal data to the United 
States.
    The International Trade Administration's Privacy Shield Team serves 
as the interagency lead for the Framework and administers the day-to-
day functioning of the Privacy Shield Program. It works with eligible 
organizations seeking to certify to the Framework by verifying that 
they have developed a Privacy Shield-compliant privacy policy; 
identified an independent recourse mechanism to investigate complaints; 
contributed to an arbitration fund; implemented compliance procedures; 
and designated a representative to handle questions, complaints, data 
access requests, and other issues related to the organization's 
participation in the Program.
    Once the Privacy Shield Team finalizes an organization's 
certification, it then adds that organization to the public-facing 
``Privacy Shield List''. This list enables European companies or other 
interested parties to verify whether data can be transferred to the 
organization under the Framework.
    An organization's public commitments to abide by the Framework's 
requirements are legally enforceable. Accordingly, to support the 
integrity of the Program, the Privacy Shield Team monitors 
organizations' compliance and potential ``red flags'' on an ongoing 
basis--and refers matters that may warrant further investigation to the 
Federal Trade Commission or the Department of Transportation for 
potential enforcement action as necessary.
    In addition, each year since 2017, senior U.S. and EU officials 
have convened to conduct intensive two-day reviews of the functioning 
of the Privacy Shield Program. As noted earlier, the Privacy Shield 
Team and I led three successful annual reviews of the Program together 
with the European Commission, European data protection authorities, and 
U.S. Government colleagues from the Departments of State, Justice, and 
Transportation, the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, 
the Federal Trade Commission, and the Privacy and Civil Liberties 
Oversight Board, among others.
    Our regular interactions with EU officials before, during, and 
after these annual Privacy Shield reviews afforded numerous 
constructive opportunities for transatlantic coordination and 
cooperation on promoting trust in the digital economy. Following the 
third annual review in Washington, DC in October 2019, for example, 
European Commissioner for Justice Vera Jourova enthusiastically 
acclaimed Privacy Shield a ``success story''.
    For four years, Privacy Shield was the most straightforward and 
cost-effective EU-approved transfer mechanism for U.S. and European 
companies of all sizes in virtually every industry. For many firms--and 
for small- and medium-sized firms especially--Privacy Shield was often 
the only viable data transfer mechanism. Many such firms simply do not 
have the resources or administrative capacity to utilize more costly 
and burdensome mechanisms like SCCs or BCRs. Of the 5,400 Privacy 
Shield participants on July 16, 2020, over 70 percent were small-and 
medium-enterprises with fewer than 500 employees.
4. SCHREMS II
    The July 16, 2020 Schrems II decision was the latest development in 
a long-running legal battle that has been waged in the Irish courts and 
the EU Court of Justice by Max Schrems. As framed by the Court, the 
central question in the case was whether--in view of U.S. law and 
practice regarding government access to personal data for national 
security purposes--Privacy Shield and SCCs provided sufficient 
safeguards to EU personal data transferred to the United States. 
Although the European Commission and several EU Member States joined 
the U.S. Government in arguing that U.S. law and practice do in fact 
satisfy EU data protection standards, the Court answered the question 
with respect to Privacy Shield with a definitive ``no''.
    The Court based its decision on two principal grounds. First, after 
analyzing the European Commission's 2016 adequacy decision for Privacy 
Shield, it found that certain U.S. intelligence access to EU personal 
data transferred under the Framework was not constrained in a way that 
satisfies the EU's legal requirement for ``proportionality''. Second, 
the Court concluded that the Privacy Shield Ombudsperson Mechanism did 
not afford sufficient redress for violations of EU individuals' right 
to data protection.
    The Schrems II decision has created enormous uncertainties for U.S. 
companies and the transatlantic economy at a particularly precarious 
time. Immediately upon issuance of the ruling, the 5,400 Privacy Shield 
participants and their business partners in the EU could no longer rely 
on the Framework as a lawful basis for transferring personal data from 
Europe to the United States. Because neither the Court nor European 
data protection authorities provided for any enforcement grace period, 
Privacy Shield companies were left with three choices: (1) risk facing 
potentially huge fines (of up to 4 percent of total global turnover in 
the preceding year) for violating GDPR, (2) withdraw from the European 
market, or (3) switch right away to another more expensive data 
transfer mechanism.
    Unfortunately, because of the Court's ruling in the Privacy Shield 
context that U.S. laws relating to government access to data do not 
confer adequate protections for EU personal data, the use of other 
mechanisms like SCCs and BCRs to transfer EU personal data to the 
United States is now in question as well.
    Since the Schrems II decision, the lack of legal clarity regarding 
data transfers from Europe to the United States has prompted some 
companies to begin considering data localization in Europe. Storing and 
processing all EU personal data in Europe, however, would be 
exceedingly expensive--especially for small- and medium-sized 
enterprises--and pose numerous technical problems for the global 
business models of most U.S. companies operating in Europe. Beyond the 
costs to individual firms, data localization measures can increase 
cybersecurity and other operational risks and make regulatory 
compliance and global risk management more difficult. Moreover, in our 
increasingly digitized economy, embracing data localization in Europe 
would set a damaging precedent for other countries and could imperil 
the open, interoperable, secure, and reliable Internet on which our 
citizens and businesses of all sizes have come to depend so heavily.
    Suffice to say, the Schrems II ruling also calls into question the 
ability of European governments to share data with the United States 
for national security and law enforcement purposes, putting citizens on 
both sides of the Atlantic at risk. European authorities should 
recognize that the mere location of data does not ensure information 
security or privacy, and there are other public policy objectives that 
are equally important, including financial stability, operational 
resilience, and innovation--all objectives that depend on cross-border 
data flows.
U.S. Government Response to Schrems II
    While we were deeply disappointed and do not agree with the Court's 
decision, we are committed to working with our European Commission 
partners to address the Court's concerns and enable companies to 
continue to transfer personal data from the EU to the United States. 
The Administration seeks to ensure the continuity of transatlantic data 
flows in a manner consistent with U.S. economic and national security 
interests.
    It is important to note that the Schrems II ruling focused 
exclusively on government access to data. The Court did not question 
the extensive protections Privacy Shield offers EU individuals with 
respect to the commercial collection and uses of personal data. We 
believe Privacy Shield already provides strong and predictable 
protections for EU individuals and any enhancements to the Framework 
will build on this strong foundation.
    As a first step in our efforts to return stability to transatlantic 
data flows, we engaged with the European Commission to begin working on 
a solution to Privacy Shield's invalidation. On August 10, Secretary 
Ross and European Commissioner for Justice Reynders released a joint 
statement announcing that the U.S. Department of Commerce and the 
European Commission had initiated discussions on potential enhancements 
to Privacy Shield Framework that address the Court's concerns.
    Thereafter, in view of the considerable uncertainties concerning 
the use of SCCs, we worked with our interagency colleagues to bolster 
companies' ability to utilize the SCCs while we worked to negotiate the 
necessary enhancements to Privacy Shield. To that end the U.S. 
Government released a White Paper to assist organizations using SCCs in 
making the case-by-case assessments called for under Schrems II as to 
whether U.S. law concerning government access to personal data meets EU 
standards. The White Paper includes a wide range of information about 
the extensive privacy protections in current U.S. law and practice 
relating to government access to data for national security purposes--
and sets forth clearly the strong and multilayered protections provided 
under our system. While it is ultimately up to companies to make their 
own assessments under EU law, the White Paper has, by all accounts, 
proven to be a useful tool in conducting those assessments.
    The objective of any potential agreement between the United States 
and the European Commission to address Schrems II is to restore the 
continuity of transatlantic data flows and the Framework's privacy 
protections by negotiating targeted enhancements to Privacy Shield that 
address the Court's concerns in Schrems II. Any such enhancements must 
respect the U.S. Government's security responsibilities to our citizens 
and allies.
    To be clear, we expect that any enhancements to the Privacy Shield 
Framework would also cover transfers under all other EU-approved data 
transfer mechanisms like SCCs and BCRs as well.
    The Schrems II decision has underscored the need for a broader 
discussion among likeminded democracies on the issue of government 
access to data. Especially as a result of the extensive U.S. 
surveillance reforms since 2015, the United States affords privacy 
protections relating to national security data access that are 
equivalent to or greater than those provided by many other democracies 
in Europe and elsewhere. To minimize future disruptions to data 
transfers, we have engaged with the European Union and other democratic 
nations in a multilateral discussion to develop principles based on 
common practices for addressing how best to reconcile law enforcement 
and national security needs for data with protection of individual 
rights.
    It is our view that democracies should come together to articulate 
shared principles regarding government access to personal data--to help 
make clear the distinction between democratic societies that respect 
civil liberties and the rule of law and authoritarian governments that 
engage in the unbridled collection of personal data to surveil, 
manipulate, and control their citizens and other individuals without 
regard to personal privacy and human rights. Such principles would 
allow us to work with like-minded partners in preserving and promoting 
a free and open Internet enabled by the seamless flow of data.
5. CONCLUSION
    In closing, the International Trade Administration, the Commerce 
Department, and the Administration remain committed to restoring 
clarity and certainty to transatlantic data flows and privacy as 
quickly as we can. We are hopeful that our European Commission partners 
share our sense of urgency, and we appreciate the support and attention 
you and your colleagues here in Congress have brought--and can continue 
to bring--to the critical issue of cross-border data flows.
    Thank you again for this opportunity to appear today.

    The Chairman. Thank you very much. Mr. Phillips.

 STATEMENT OF HON. NOAH JOSHUA PHILLIPS, COMMISSIONER, FEDERAL 
                        TRADE COMMISSION

    Mr. Phillips. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Wicker, 
Ranking Member Cantwell, members of the Committee, thank you 
for the opportunity to testify before you today. My testimony 
is my own and does not necessarily reflect the views of other 
Federal Trade Commissioners or the Commission itself. The 
Schrems II decision and the growth of other impediments to 
cross-border data flows deserve serious attention. This 
committee has engaged already and today's hearing is an 
important continuation of that effort. I thank you.
    Mr. Sullivan testified about the terrific work the 
Administration is doing, and with Presidential transition 
already underway, your leadership and your support for a path 
forward are essential. The privacy work of the FTC helps 
support the free and open Internet. Since the 1990s, we have 
pursued hundreds of privacy cases, hosted dozens of workshops, 
and produced many reports relating to privacy and data 
security. On the Privacy Shield framework and its predecessor 
specifically, we have brought over 60 cases enforcing 
commitments that companies make.
    I submitted a written statement that I will briefly address 
the importance of cross-border data flows, the FTC's role in 
supporting them, impediments they face, and suggestions on 
moving forward. From small startups to our largest technology 
companies, connected cars to contact tracing, American 
companies are competing and winning by offering products and 
services built on data. Our businesses employ data to support 
new technologies like artificial intelligence, and as the 
COVID-19 crisis makes clear, to meet longstanding needs like 
education, worship, health, and work. Cross-border data flows 
are an essential component to that. Companies of all sizes, but 
particularly small businesses, rely on them to reach new 
customers abroad, to enhance security, and to reduce costs. 
That means jobs for American workers, and products and services 
for American consumers.
    At FTC, our enforcement approach emphasizes harms with a 
substantial impact on consumers, permitting both innovation and 
enforcement. Recent cases include TikTok, before the company 
was a matter of national conversation, Facebook, YouTube, and 
just recently Zoom. By any reasonable metric, our enforcement 
program has had a greater impact than any in the world. We have 
been a key partner in Privacy Shield and are committed to 
working with the Department of Commerce to support the free 
transatlantic flow of data. Today, those flows are at risk.
    The European Court of Justice struck down Privacy Shield, 
expressing concerns about U.S. protections for European data, 
including redress. The decision also raised questions about 
standard contractual clauses, the other common legal basis for 
transfers. That creates legal uncertainty, a cost borne 
disproportionately by smaller companies, the bulk of Privacy 
Shield participants. The court's decision concerned National 
Security and three things strike me as noteworthy. First, U.S. 
law and practice incorporate substantial civil liberty 
protections against Government surveillance. Second, the U.S. 
is at least as protective of privacy as the domestic laws of 
many of our European allies.
    Finally, as Adam Klein, Chairman of the Privacy and Civil 
Liberties Oversight Board recently noted, European allies 
regularly partner with the U.S. to assist in their collection 
of intelligence data. Beyond Schrems II, prominent European 
voices have called for data localization requirements, 
sometimes under the rubric of data sovereignty. Localization 
also poses a threat to cross-border data flows.
    Historically, we associate it with a kind of State-
controlled Internet governance in countries like China. Liberal 
democracies, which have distinct but fundamentally common 
approaches to privacy and civil liberties, should be uniting, 
not splintering. Not only will this aid U.S. commerce, it will 
demonstrate a better way for those countries yet to decide on a 
path for their digital future. So, what can we do? First, we 
need to find a path to permit transfers between the U.S. and 
EU.
    As exemplified by Jim and his team, this has been a 
priority for the Administration, and I have every hope and 
expectation that it will remain one for the incoming 
Administration, and I ask for your help in ensuring that it is. 
Second, we must continue to engage with nations evaluating 
their approach to digital governance to promote the benefits of 
a free and open Internet. Third, we should vocally defend 
American values. When it comes to civil liberties and the 
enforcement of privacy laws, we are second to none. Fourth, as 
European leaders call to strengthen ties with the U.S., we 
should prioritize making our regimes interoperable.
    Relatively minor differences should not impede mutually 
beneficial commerce. Finally, any lines should be drawn between 
allies with shared values and others, like China, which offer a 
starkly different vision of Internet governance. I thank the 
Committee for engaging with these challenges and for inviting 
me, and I look forward to your questions.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Phillips follows:]

   Prepared Statement of Hon. Noah Joshua Phillips,\1\ Commissioner, 
                        Federal Trade Commission
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ My comments today are my own and do not necessarily reflect the 
views of the Commission or my fellow Commissioners.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Chairman Wicker, Ranking Member Cantwell, Members of the Committee, 
thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today.
    As the agency charged with enforcing the bulk of U.S. privacy law, 
the Federal Trade Commission supports cross-border data flows through 
law enforcement, cooperation with the Department of Commerce and other 
agencies in international engagement, and research and advocacy 
concerning privacy and data security law and policy. Specifically with 
respect to the EU-U.S. Privacy Shield Framework (``Privacy Shield'') 
and its predecessor, we have brought over 60 enforcement actions 
against companies that have failed to live up to their commitments, 
participated in the Privacy Shield annual review process, and worked 
with counterpart independent data protection authorities on a host of 
issues.
    A free and open Internet is vital to the national interest, but it 
is at risk. The impact on U.S. commerce and cross-border data flows 
from the ``Schrems II'' decision by the European Union Court of Justice 
(``ECJ''),\2\ and the growth of other impediments to that commerce, 
deserve our serious and immediate attention. This Committee has engaged 
actively since the ECJ's decision was rendered in August, and today's 
hearing marks an important, bipartisan, continuation of that effort. 
With terrific work ongoing by this Administration--about which you will 
hear today--and a presidential transition underway, your leadership in 
drawing attention to this issue and your support for a path forward are 
essential.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \2\ Case C-311/18, Data Prot. Comm'r v. Facebook Ireland & 
Maximillian Schrems, ECLI:EU:C:2020:559 (July 16, 2020) (``Schrems 
II'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    My testimony will address the importance of cross-border data 
flows, the Federal Trade Commission's role in supporting them, the 
impediments they nonetheless face, and some suggestions on how to move 
forward.
The Importance of Cross-Border Data Flows
    Data help power the U.S. economy. From small startups to our 
largest technology companies, connected cars to contact tracing, 
American companies are competing and winning by offering consumers and 
clients products and services built on data. Our businesses employ data 
to develop new technologies like artificial intelligence and also to 
help meet longstanding needs, like education, worship, health, and 
office work, in novel ways. The COVID-19 crisis makes this abundantly 
clear.
    Cross-border data flows are an essential component enabling all of 
this. Companies of all sizes rely on these data flows to innovate, 
reach new customers abroad, improve efficiency, enhance security, and 
reduce costs,\3\ permitting the expansion and innovation that draws 
investment capital and creates jobs at home. That is particularly true 
for small companies, which cannot afford to, for example, establish 
offices or host data centers overseas. Cross-border data flows allow 
these companies to gain scale more rapidly and compete internationally 
at lower cost and with less risk. That is doubtless why 65 percent of 
companies participating in Privacy Shield are small and medium 
businesses.\4\ A 2016 study found that almost two-thirds of worldwide 
startups surveyed had customers or users in other countries.\5\ Take 
Etsy, the Brooklyn-based custom craft marketplace that offers small 
businesses a turnkey option to reach a global customer base. In 2019, 
cross-border transactions made up the largest component of the 36 
percent of business attributable to Etsy's international business.\6\ 
Or consider that PayPal--based in San Jose and serving many smaller 
businesses--has processed over $400 billion in cross border payments 
since 2003.\7\ The list goes on.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \3\ See, e.g., Joshua P. Meltzer & Peter Lovelock, Regulating for a 
Digital Economy: Understanding the Importance of Cross-border Data 
Flows in Asia 6 (Brookings Inst. Global Econ. & Dev. Working Paper No. 
113) (Mar. 20, 2018), https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/
2018/03/digital-economy_meltzer_lovelock_web.pdf (discussing access to 
new markets and capabilities of ``digital inputs such as cloud 
computing [which] provides on-demand access to computing power and 
software that was previously reserved for large companies''); ICC 
Comm'n on Trade & Inv. Pol'y & ICC Comm'n on the Digit. Econ., Int'l 
Chamber of Com., Trade in the Digital Economy: A Primer on Global Data 
Flows for Policymakers 2 (2016), https://cdn.iccwbo.org/content/
uploads/sites/3/2016/09/Trade-in-the-digital-economy-A-primer-on-
global-data-flows-for-policymakers.pdf (``Access to digital products 
and services, such as cloud applications, provides SMEs with cutting 
edge services at competitive prices, enabling them to participate in 
global supply chains and directly access customers in foreign markets 
in ways previously only feasible for larger companies. Indeed, the 
Internet is a great equalizer, enabling small companies to compete 
globally using the same tools as large and established companies.''); 
Bus. Roundtable, Putting Data to Work: Maximizing the Value of 
Information in an Interconnected World 6 (2015), https://
s3.amazonaws.com/brt.org/archive/reports/BRT%20PuttingDataToWork.pdf 
(discussing how Caterpillar uses sensor data to allow it ``and its 
customers to remotely monitor assets across their fleets in real 
time''); Demetrios Marantis, Cross-border data flows power small 
business recovery, Visa, Inc. (Nov. 9, 2020), https://usa.visa.com/
visa-everywhere/blog/bdp/2020/11/09/cross-border-data-flows-
1604955432332.html (noting that cross-border data flows are used to 
improve AI the provides fraud detection).
    \4\ Oliver Patel & Dr. Nathan Lea, UCL Eur. Inst, EU-U.S. Privacy 
Shield, Brexit and the Future of Transatlantic Data Flows 12 (May 
2020), https://www.ucl.ac.uk/european-institute/
sites/european-institute/files/
privacy_shield_brexit_and_the_future_of_transatlantic_data_flows
_1.pdf.
    \5\ James Manyika & Susan Lund, Digital Protectionism and Barriers 
to International Data Flows, Bretton Woods Comm. (Jun. 25, 2018), 
https://www.brettonwoods.org/article/digital-protectionism-and-
barriers-to-international-data-flows.
    \6\ Etsy, Inc., Annual Report (Form 10-K) 66 (Feb. 27, 2020), 
https://d18rn0p25nwr6d.cloud
front.net/CIK-0001370637/d63aa848-ac0c-474c-9350-5b18888e84bf.pdf. 
International business includes all transactions ``where either the 
billing address for the seller or the shipping address for the buyer at 
the time of sale is outside of the United States.'' Id.
    \7\ Peggy Abkemeier, Cross-Border Trade: PayPal's $400B Business, 
PayPal Holdings, Inc. (Apr. 6, 2017), https://www.paypal.com/stories/
us/cross-border-trade-paypals-400b-business.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The impact of cross-border digital commerce numbers in the 
trillions of dollars, adding by some estimates hundreds of billions of 
dollars annually to U.S. GDP.\8\ And there is every reason to believe 
that, if allowed to do so, those numbers will continue to grow. Cross-
border data flows are a critical input to our technology sector, in 
which American companies lead the way. Of technology firms in the 
Fortune Global 500, the U.S. has 12, nearly double the number of Japan, 
the next on the list.\9\ With our increasingly data-driven economy, 
cross-border data flows also drive innovation and growth in other 
sectors as well. At the end of the day, all of that means jobs for 
American workers and products for consumers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \8\ James Manyika et al., McKinsey & Co., Digital Globalization: 
The New Era of Global Flows 10 (Feb. 24, 2016), https://
www.mckinsey.com//media/McKinsey/Business%20Functions/
McKinsey%20Digital/Our%20Insights/
Digital%20globalization%20The%20new%20era%20of%20
global%20flows/MGI-Digital-globalization-Full-report.pdf (estimating 
impact on global GDP of $2.8 trillion in 2014); Gary Clyde Hufbauer & 
Zhiyao (Lucy) Lu, Can Digital Flows Compensate for Lethargic Trade and 
Investment?, Petersen Inst. for Int'l Econ. (Nov. 28, 2018), https://
www.piie.com/blogs/trade-investment-policy-watch/can-digital-flows-
compensate-lethargic-trade-and-investment (estimating impact on global 
GDP of over $3.5 trillion in 2020); U.S. Int'l Trade Comm'n, No. 4485, 
Digital Trade in the U.S. and Global Economies, Part 2, at 13 (Aug. 
2014), https://www.usitc.gov/publications/332/pub4485.pdf (estimating 
2011 impact on U.S. GDP of over $500 billion).
    \9\ Fortune Global 500, Fortune (2020), https://fortune.com/
global500/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Role of the FTC
    The Federal Trade Commission plays an important role in supporting 
the promise of the free and open Internet, including cross-border data 
flows.
    With respect to data privacy and security, we help ensure that 
companies communicate honestly with their customers about their privacy 
and security practices and refrain from unfair privacy or security 
practices.
    Since the enactment of the Fair Credit Reporting Act (``FCRA'') in 
1970,\10\ the FTC has served as the primary Federal agency protecting 
consumer privacy. With the development of the Internet as a commercial 
medium in the 1990s, the Commission expanded its focus on privacy to 
reflect the growing collection, use, and sharing of consumer data in 
the commercial marketplace. The Commission's main source of legal 
authority in the privacy and data security space is Section 5 of the 
FTC Act, which prohibits deceptive or unfair commercial practices.\11\ 
Under Section 5 and other statutes such as the Gramm-Leach-Bliley 
Act,\12\ the Children's Online Privacy Protection Act,\13\ and the 
FCRA, the FTC has aggressively pursued cases in children's privacy, 
financial privacy, health privacy, the Internet of Things, and beyond. 
In total, we have brought hundreds of data security and privacy cases 
and we have hosted about 75 workshops and issued approximately 50 
reports in the privacy and security area, on topics from data brokers 
\14\ to portability.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \10\ Fair Credit Reporting Act, 15 U.S.C. Sec. 1681 et seq.
    \11\ 15 U.S.C. Sec. 45.
    \12\ Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, Pub. L. No. 106-102, 113 Stat. 1338 
(1999) (codified as amended in scattered sections of 12 and 15 U.S.C.); 
Standards for Safeguarding Customer Information, 16 C.F.R. Sec. 314.
    \13\ Children's Online Privacy Protection Act, 15 U.S.C. 
Sec. Sec. 6501-6506; Children's Online Privacy Protection Rule, 16 
C.F.R. Sec. 312.
    \14\ See FTC Report, Data Brokers: A Call for Transparency and 
Accountability (May 2014), https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/documents/
reports/data-brokers-call-transparency-accountability-report-federal-
trade-commission-may-2014/140527databrokerreport.pdf.
    \15\ See FTC Workshop, Data To Go: An FTC Workshop on Data 
Portability (Sept. 22, 2020), https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/events-
calendar/data-go-ftc-workshop-data-portability.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Our approach emphasizes addressing harms that have a tangible, 
substantial impact on consumers' well-being. This allows for both 
innovation and enforcement. There are scores of Data Protection 
Authorities in nations around the world, but no agency has engaged in 
more, or more significant, privacy and data security enforcement than 
the FTC. In just the few years of my tenure and those of my fellow 
commissioners, we have finalized settlements with Facebook \16\ and 
Google/YouTube \17\ that mandated both substantial monetary relief and 
significant improvements in privacy governance practices. In early 
2019, we resolved a case against TikTok, long before the company was a 
matter of national conversation.\18\ And, just a few weeks ago, we 
settled a case against Zoom, including allegations regarding 
representations the company made about the security of stored and 
transferred data.\19\ In my view, by any reasonable metric, our 
enforcement program has had a greater impact than any other in the 
world.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \16\ See FTC Press Release, FTC Imposes $5 Billion Penalty and 
Sweeping New Privacy Restrictions on Facebook (July 24, 2019), https://
www.ftc.gov/news-events/press-releases/2019/07/ftc-imposes-5-billion-
penalty-sweeping-new-privacy-restrictions.
    \17\ See FTC Press Release, Google and YouTube Will Pay Record $170 
Million for Alleged Violations of Children's Privacy Law (Sept. 4, 
2019), https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/press-releases/2019/09/google-
youtube-will-pay-record-170-million-alleged-violations.
    \18\ See FTC Press Release, Video Social Networking App Musically 
Agrees to Settle FTC Allegations That it Violated Children's Privacy 
Law (Feb. 27, 2019), https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/press-releases/
2019/02/video-social-networking-app-musically-agrees-settle-ftc.
    \19\ See FTC Press Release, FTC Requires Zoom to Enhance its 
Security Practices as Part of Settlement (Nov. 9, 2020), https://
www.ftc.gov/news-events/press-releases/2020/11/ftc-requires-
zoom-enhance-its-security-practices-part-settlement.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The Commission has played an important role in Privacy Shield \20\ 
and its predecessor, the U.S.-EU Safe Harbor Framework (``Safe 
Harbor'').\21\ Under the EU's General Data Protection Regulation 
(``GDPR'') and its predecessors, companies are required to meet certain 
data protection requirements in order to transfer consumer data from 
the EU to other jurisdictions.\22\ Privacy Shield and Safe Harbor are 
voluntary mechanisms ensuring compliance with European requirements 
that have provided legal bases for companies to transfer data from 
Europe to the United States.\23\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \20\ See FTC Business Guidance, Privacy Shield (2020), https://
www.ftc.gov/tips-advice/business-center/privacy-and-security/privacy-
shield. While I focus here on the U.S.-EU agreements, there was 
previously a U.S.-Swiss version of Safe Harbor that was replaced by a 
U.S.-Swiss version of Privacy Shield. The Swiss data protection 
authorities recently reached a similar decision as the court in Schrems 
II. Mark Smith, ANALYSIS: Swiss-U.S. Privacy Shield Suffers from 
Schrems, Too, Bloomberg L. (Sept. 10, 2020), https://
news.bloomberglaw.com/bloomberg-law-analysis/analysis-swiss-u-s-
privacy-shield-suffers-from-schrems-too.
    \21\ See FTC Business Guidance, Federal Trade Commission 
Enforcement of the U.S.-EU and U.S.-Swiss Safe Harbor Frameworks 
(2016), https://www.ftc.gov/tips-advice/business-center
/guidance/federal-trade-commission-enforcement-us-eu-us-swiss-safe-
harbor.
    \22\ Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the 
Council, Art. 45, General Data Protection Regulation, 2016 O.J. (L 119) 
1, 41.
    \23\ Privacy Shield is not the only mechanism for transferring data 
to the U.S. from the EU. As discussed below, GDPR permits transfers 
made using Standard Contractual Clauses and Binding Corporate Rules.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The FTC can bring enforcement actions against companies that 
misrepresent their participation in or compliance with Privacy Shield. 
We have brought over 60 cases enforcing companies' commitments under 
Safe Harbor and Privacy Shield. We also fill a similar role with the 
APEC Cross-Border Privacy Rules system, designed to protect privacy and 
data flows in the Asia-Pacific region.\24\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \24\ See FTC Press Release, FTC Becomes First Enforcement Authority 
in APEC Cross-Border Privacy Rules System (July 26, 2012), https://
www.ftc.gov/news-events/press-releases/2012
/07/ftc-becomes-first-enforcement-authority-apec-cross-border-privacy.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Even though the court declared the Privacy Shield invalid, which I 
discuss below, the FTC continues to expect companies to comply with 
their ongoing obligations with respect to transfers made under Privacy 
Shield. If companies do not keep their promises, we will enforce the 
law against them. We also encourage companies to continue to follow 
robust privacy principles, such as those underlying Privacy Shield, and 
to review their privacy policies to ensure they describe their privacy 
practices accurately, including with regard to cross-border data 
transfers. The Commission remains committed to working with the 
Department of Commerce to help support the free flow of data across 
borders.
Schrems II
    Notwithstanding these efforts, the privacy protections U.S. law 
provides U.S. citizens and non-citizens, and the tremendous work this 
Administration and the prior one have done with their counterparts on 
the European Commission (the Executive Branch of the EU), transatlantic 
data flows are threatened.
    In 2016, the European Commission deemed Privacy Shield 
``adequate'', thus permitting transfers to the U.S. under the 
framework.\25\ In its recent ruling in Schrems II, the ECJ struck down 
Privacy Shield. The court expressed concerns about U.S. protections 
described in the European Commission's Privacy Shield Adequacy 
Decision, including the independence of the Ombudsman mechanism 
established in the U.S. Department of State and the perceived lack of 
redress for EU data subjects.\26\ Additionally, the court required 
companies that rely on Standard Contractual Clauses (``SCCs'') to 
assess the level of protection in the importing country for all of 
their transfers, raising questions about SCCs as a legal basis for 
transfers to the U.S.\27\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \25\ Eur. Comm'n, Commercial Sector: EU-US Privacy Shield, https://
ec.europa.eu/info/law/
law-topic/data-protection/international-dimension-data-protection/eu-
us-data-transfers_en#:
:text=The%20adequacy%20decision%20on%20the,United%20States%20for%20comme
rcial%20
purposes.
    \26\ Schrems II, supra note 2,  186-198.
    \27\ Schrems II, supra note 2,  142. To be sure, it is the view of 
many, including the Commerce Department, that SCCs are still available, 
at least for some transfers. But even where SCCs may still be 
available, the complexity and risk of using them has increased. See 
Dep't of Com. et al., Information on U.S. Privacy Safeguards Relevant 
to SCCs and Other EU Legal Bases for EU-U.S. Data Transfers after 
Schrems II (Sept. 2020), https://www.commerce.gov/sites/default/files/
2020-09/SCCsWhitePaperFORMATTEDFINAL508COMPLIANT.PDF.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The Schrems II decision and recent recommendations from the 
European Data Protection Board,\28\ the coordinating body of local data 
protection authorities under the GDPR, create substantial legal 
uncertainty and risk for cross-border data transfers. Those costs are 
borne disproportionately by small companies, which cannot afford the 
more expensive options, and for that reason constitute the bulk of 
companies that participate in Privacy Shield.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \28\ Eur. Data Prot. Bd., Recommendations 01/2020 on Measures That 
Supplement Transfer Tools to Ensure Compliance with the EU Level of 
Protection of Personal Data (Nov. 10, 2020), https://edpb.europa.eu/
sites/edpb/files/consultation/edpb_recommendations_202001_supple
mentarymeasurestransferstools_en.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The court's decision concerned national security access to personal 
data, not consumer privacy in the sense that we enforce at the FTC. 
Meaning, what was at issue in Schrems II was not the absence of a GDPR-
like national consumer privacy law in the U.S.
    Looking at how the court considered U.S. national security access 
to personal data, three things strike me. First, U.S. law and practice 
incorporate civil liberty protections against government surveillance 
that are substantial, including statutes such as the Electronic 
Communications Privacy Act \29\ and the Judicial Redress Act \30\ and 
executive actions like Presidential Policy Directive 28.\31\ Second, as 
researchers in the U.S. and Europe have found, U.S. law and practice 
are at least as protective of privacy as the domestic laws of many of 
our European allies.\32\ The court, however, deemed European domestic 
laws irrelevant, focusing instead on what Professor Peter Swire has 
referred to as ``an idealized, formal standard set forth primarily in 
EU constitutional law'', rather than the national security laws and 
practices of members states.\33\ Finally, as Adam Klein, Chairman of 
the Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board recently noted, those 
allies regularly partner with the U.S. to assist in their collection of 
valuable intelligence data.\34\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \29\ Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986, Pub. L. No. 99-
508, 100 Stat. 1848 (codified as amended in scattered sections of 18 
U.S.C.).
    \30\ Judicial Redress Act, 5 U.S.C. Sec. 552a note.
    \31\ Presidential Policy Directive 28--Signals Intelligence 
Activities, 1 Pub. Papers 46 (Jan. 17, 2014), https://www.govinfo.gov/
content/pkg/PPP-2014-book1/pdf/PPP-2014-book1-doc-pg46
.pdf.
    \32\ See, e.g., Jacques Bourgeois et al., Sidley Austin LLP, 
Essentially Equivalent: A Comparison of the Legal Orders for Privacy 
and Data Protection in the European Union and United States, at iv 
(Jan. 2016), https://www.sidley.com/-/media/publications/essentially-
equivalent-final.pdf (arguing that ``the U.S. legal order for privacy 
and data protection embodies fundamental rights consistent with the 
Charter, principles of proportionality, and checks and balances in both 
form and substance, and that these protections of privacy and data 
protection rights are essentially equivalent to those in the EU'').
    \33\ Kenneth Propp & Peter Swire, Geopolitical Implications of the 
European Court's Schrems II Decision, Lawfare (July 17, 2020), https://
www.lawfareblog.com/geopolitical-implications-european-courts-schrems-
ii-decision.
    \34\ Adam Klein, Chairman, Priv. & C.L. Oversight Bd., Statement on 
the Terrorist Finance Tracking Program (Nov. 19, 2020), https://
documents.pclob.gov/prod/Documents/EventsAnd
Press/b8ce341a-71d5-4cdd-a101-219454bfa459/
TFTP%20Chairman%20Statement%2011_19_20
.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Schrems II is not the only risk factor for cross-border data flows. 
Both before and since the decision, sometimes under the rubric of 
``data sovereignty'', a number of prominent European voices \35\ have 
called for data localization requirements in Europe--that is, for all 
data about Europeans to be kept in Europe.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \35\ See, e.g., Vincent Manancourt, Europe's data grab, Politico 
(Feb. 12, 2020), https://www.politico.eu/article/europe-data-grab-
protection-privacy/; Thierry Breton, Comm'r, Europe: The Keys To 
Sovereignty, Eur. Comm'n (Sept. 11, 2020), https://ec.europa.eu/
commission/commissioners/2019-2024/breton/announcements/europe-keys-
sovereignty_en.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    By no means are data localization concerns unique to Europe. By 
some estimates, localization efforts have grown fourfold since 2000, 
including many sector-specific rules requiring that certain data be 
processed or maintained in-country.\36\ Countries that have, or are 
considering, localization requirements include India, Vietnam, 
Australia, and Turkey.\37\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \36\ Christian Ketels & Arindam Bhattacharya, Global Trade Goes 
Digital, Bos. Consulting Grp. (Aug. 12, 2019), https://www.bcg.com/
publications/2019/global-trade-goes-digital; Jennifer Huddleston & 
Jacqueline Varas, Impact of Data Localization Requirements on Commerce 
and Innovation, Am. Action F. (June 16, 2020), https://
www.americanactionforum.org/insight/impact-of-data-localization-
requirements-on-commerce-and-innovation/#ixzz6YgQOlW4C (``The data 
covered by these laws can range from all personal data to only specific 
types of data such as health or financial information.'').
    \37\ Pablo Urbiola et al., Inst. of Int'l Fin., Data Flows Across 
Borders: Overcoming Data Localization Restrictions 1, 2 (Mar. 2019), 
https://www.iif.com/Portals/0/Files/32370132_iif_data
_flows_across_borders_march2019.pdf; David Meyer, Here's Why PayPal Is 
About to Suspend Operations in Turkey, Fortune (May 31, 2016), https://
fortune.com/2016/05/31/paypal-turkey-suspension/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Adopting data localization around the world poses a threat to U.S. 
commerce as well as the free and open Internet. To do business in 
multiple countries, companies will need servers, local staff, and so 
on. For smaller companies and startups, this may spell the end of 
cross-border commerce. The result will negatively impact not only 
American companies looking to grow but American consumers who benefit 
from products improved by cross-border data flows.
    For larger firms that can add processing capacity overseas, there 
still are downsides. For instance, localization inhibits the global 
backup and redundancy that a distributed network allows, and the 
privacy and security that come with it.\38\ Even something as 
uncontroversial as bug and error reporting from individual computers--
which allows companies to analyze and correct software issues--may 
become a local function deprived of critical inputs. And research 
institutions will feel the impact, with cross-border collaboration in 
areas like medicine and computer science--where access to large and 
global data sets are essential--newly subject to digital 
boundaries.\39\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \38\ For example, data may be divided into shards, with any 
individual's data split up across multiple machines across the world. H 
Jacqueline Brehmer, Data Localization: The Unintended Consequences of 
Privacy Litigation, 67 Am. U. L. Rev. 927, 967-986 (2018), https://
digitalcom
mons.wcl.american.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2009&context=aulr; 
Dillon Reisman, Where Is Your Data, Really?: The Technical Case Against 
Data Localization, Lawfare (May 22, 2017), https://www.lawfareblog.com/
where-your-data-really-technical-case-against-data-localization.
    \39\ See, e.g., PHG Found., Impact of Schrems II on Genomic Data 
Sharing (2020), https://www.phgfoundation.org/documents/schrems-ii-
discussion-paper.pdf (noting how Schrems II impacts genomic research).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Data localization requirements are nothing new but historically 
have more often been associated with alternative visions of Internet 
governance in countries like China and Russia. The hallmark of this 
alternative is state control: the opposite of a free and open Internet. 
China uses technical controls (its ``great firewall'') and legal 
controls to filter what is available to Chinese citizens.\40\ There is 
active censorship at the national level, such that you can't type 
Winnie the Pooh--a reference used by critics of President Xi--into 
Weibo without it being deleted.\41\ And, not surprisingly, China also 
requires that substantial amounts of data be stored on servers in 
China.\42\ Data stored locally are accessible to the government upon 
request, and without due process.\43\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \40\ Elizabeth C. Economy, The great firewall of China: Xi 
Jinping's Internet shutdown, Guardian (June 29, 2018), https://
www.theguardian.com/news/2018/jun/29/the-great-firewall-of-china-xi-
jinpings-internet-shutdown.
    \41\ Yuan Yang, Winnie the Pooh blacklisted by China's online 
censors, Fin. Times (July 16, 2017), https://www.ft.com/content/
cf7fd22e-69d5-11e7-bfeb-33fe0c5b7eaa.
    \42\ Yuxi Wei, Chinese Data Localization Law: Comprehensive but 
Ambiguous, Henry M. Jackson Sch. of Int'l Stud., Univ. of Wash. (Feb. 
7, 2018), https://jsis.washington.edu/news/chinese-data-localization-
law-comprehensive-ambiguous/ (localization requirements in China are 
comprehensive but also confusing and ambiguous).
    \43\ Afef Abrougi, Chinese law and state security requirements 
stunt companies' progress in 2019 RDR Index, Ranking Digit. Rts. (July 
17, 2019), https://rankingdigitalrights.org/2019/07/17/chinese-law-and-
state-security-requirements-stunt-companies-progress-in-2019-rdr-index/ 
(Chinese law requires ``to keep user activity logs and relevant data 
for six months and to hand it over to the authorities when requested 
without due process''); Martina F. Ferracane & Hosuk Lee-Makiyama, Eur. 
Ctr. For Int'l Pol. Econ., China's Technology Protectionism and its 
Non-negotiable Rationales 3 (June 2017), https://ecipe.org/wp-content/
uploads/2017/06/DTE
_China_TWP_REVIEWED.pdf (``[T]he State Security Law (passed in 1993) 
provides the state security organs with access to any information or 
data held by an entity in China whenever they deem it necessary. 
Without doubt, the scope of the State Security Law has grown 
exponentially in the digitalisation era.''); Adrian Shahbaz, Freedom 
House, The Rise of Digital Authori
tarianism (2018), https://freedomhouse.org/report/freedom-net/2018/
rise-digital-authoritaria
nism (``China was once again the worst abuser of Internet freedom in 
2018.'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Russia also maintains strict data localization laws (though not 
always enforced);\44\ allows for blacklisting of Internet sites;\45\ 
and has experimented with creating, in effect, its own internet, with 
exclusively in-country routing, DNS, and the like.\46\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \44\ Vera Shaftan, Russian Data Localization law: now with monetary 
penalties, Data Prot. Rep. (Dec. 20, 2019), https://
www.dataprotectionreport.com/2019/12/russian-data-localization-law-now-
with-monetary-penalties/
#::text=By%20way%20of%20recap%2C%20in,using%20databases
%20located%20in%20Russia (``[I]n 2015, Russia introduced a data 
localization law, requiring ``data operators'' to ensure that 
recording, systematisation, accumulation, storage, refinement and 
extraction of personal data of Russian citizens is done using databases 
located in Russia.'').
    \45\ Freedom House, Freedom on the Net 2019, Russia (2019), https:/
/freedomhouse.org/country/russia/freedom-net/2019 (``The government 
gives several state bodies--including Roskomnadzor, the Prosecutor 
General's Office, the Federal Service for Surveillance on Consumer 
Rights Protection and Human Wellbeing (Rospotrebnadzor), the Federal 
Drug Control Service, and, most recently, the Federal Agency for Youth 
Affairs--the authority to block various categories of online 
content.'').
    \46\ Isabelle Khurshudyan, Russia is bolstering its Internet 
censorship powers--is it turning into China?, Independent (Feb. 3, 
2020), https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/europe/russia-internet-
censorship-norway-putin-a9306666.html (observing that a 2019 law ``aims 
to route Russian web traffic and data through points controlled by 
state authorities and to build a national domain name system. This, 
supporters claim, would give Russia greater control of Internet content 
and traffic.'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Let me stress that the liberal democracies of Europe are nothing 
like China and Russia, but impeding cross-border data flows and 
erecting unnecessary barriers--the ``Splinternet'', as Stanford Law 
Professor Mark Lemley refers to it in a recent article \47\--will 
reverberate. In many parts of the world, including nations with which 
the U.S. does substantial commerce, which path to follow remains an 
open question. Liberal democracies should be uniting--not dividing--to 
light the better path.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \47\ Mark A. Lemley, The Splinternet (Stan. Law & Econ. Olin 
Working Paper No. 555, 2020), http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3664027. 
Professor Lemley is not the first to use this term.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Next Steps
    All of this demonstrates the need to foster transatlantic data 
flows, and international ones more broadly.
    First, we need to find a path forward after Schrems II, to permit 
transfers between the U.S. and EU. I want to recognize the efforts of 
U.S. and EU negotiators to find a replacement for Privacy Shield. While 
no doubt challenging, I have confidence in the good faith and 
commitment of public servants like Jim Sullivan, with whom I have the 
honor of appearing today, and our partners across the Atlantic. I have 
every hope and expectation that protecting cross-border data flows will 
be a priority for the incoming Administration, and I ask for your help 
in ensuring it is.
    Second, we must actively engage with nations evaluating their 
approach to digital governance, something we at the FTC have done, to 
share and promote the benefits of a free and open Internet. There is an 
active conversation ongoing internationally, and at every opportunity--
whether in public forums or via private assistance--we must ensure our 
voice and view is heard.
    Third, we should be vocal in our defense of American values and 
policies. While we as Americans always look to improve our laws--and I 
commend the members of this committee on their important work on 
privacy legislation and other critical matters--we do not need to 
apologize to the world. When it comes to civil liberties or the 
enforcement of privacy laws, we are second to none. Indeed, in my view, 
the overall U.S. privacy framework--especially with the additional 
protections built into Privacy Shield--should certainly qualify as 
adequate under EU standards.
    Fourth, as European leaders call to strengthen ties with the U.S., 
we should prioritize making our regimes compatible for the free flow of 
data. This extends to the data governance regimes of like-minded 
countries outside of Europe as well. Different nations will have 
different rules, but relatively minor differences need not impede 
mutually-beneficial commerce.\48\ We need not and should not purport to 
aim for a single, identical system of data governance. And we should 
remind our allies, and remind ourselves, that far more unites liberal 
democracies than divides us.\49\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \48\ See, e.g., Remarks of Jennifer Daskal, Debate: We Need to 
Protect Strong National Borders on The Internet, 17 Colo. Tech. L.J., 
13, 27 (``[T]he goal is to figure out a way to mediate, and manage, 
those differences, without yielding a fractured Internet.'').
    \49\ For one model of how to bridge the divide, consider the CLOUD 
Act, which provides for U.S. law enforcement access to data stored 
overseas while recognizing and respecting the citizens and laws of the 
hosting country. See, e.g., Alan Charles Raul, Global Overview, 
Privacy, Data Prot. and Cybersecurity L. Rev., 1, 2 (Alan Charles Raul 
ed., 2020), https://www
.sidley.com/-/media/publications/the-privacy-data-protection-and-
cybersecurity-law-review-2020-global-overview.pdf?la=en; Daskal, supra 
note 48, at 29.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Fifth and finally, if we must draw lines, those lines should be 
drawn between allies with shared values--the U.S., Europe, Japan, 
Australia, and others--and those, like China and Russia, that offer a 
starkly different vision. I am certainly encouraged when I hear 
recognition of this distinction from Europe. European Data Protection 
Supervisor Wojciech Wiewiorowski recently noted that the U.S. is much 
closer to Europe than is China and that he has a preference for data 
being processed by countries that share values with Europe.\50\ Some 
here in the U.S. are even proposing agreements to solidify the 
relationships among technologically advanced democracies, an idea worth 
exploring in more detail.\51\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \50\ Peter Swire, `Schrems II' backs the European legal regime into 
a corner--How can it get out?, IAPP (July 16, 2020), https://iapp.org/
news/a/schrems-ii-backs-the-european-legal-regime-into-a-corner-how-
can-it-get-out/.
    \51\ See, e.g., Robert K. Knake, Council on Foreign Rels., 
Weaponizing Digital Trade: Creating a Digital Trade Zone to Promote 
Online Freedom and Cybersecurity (Sept. 2020), https://cdn.cfr.org/
sites/default/files/report_pdf/weaponizing-digital-
trade_csr_combined_final.pdf; Jared Cohen & Richard Fontaine, Uniting 
the Techno-Democracies, Foreign Affs., Nov.-Dec. 2020, https://
www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/united-states/2020-10-13/uniting-
techno-democracies (suggesting an informal group of technologically 
advanced states which would hold regular meetings).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    However we proceed will require vision and leadership, and that is 
why I am so glad that this committee is prepared to engage thoughtfully 
with these challenges.
    Again, thank you for inviting me today, and I look forward to your 
questions.

    The Chairman. Thank you very much. Ms. Espinel, you are 
recognized.

STATEMENT OF VICTORIA A. ESPINEL, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE 
              OFFICER, BSA | THE SOFTWARE ALLIANCE

    Ms. Espinel. Good morning--and members of the Committee. My 
name is Victoria Espinel and I am President and CEO of BSA | 
the Software Alliance. Data flows are not often the topic of 
headlines or congressional hearings, even though they are 
integral to our daily lives. That is because when they are 
permitted and when the data is kept private, our expectations 
as consumers are met and our businesses can operate 
effectively. However, if they are disrupted, we all face 
problems.
    I commend the Committee for holding this hearing on the 
critical issue of cross-border data transfers and for the 
opportunity to testify here today. Today's consumers and 
businesses of all sizes and in all industries expect services 
that offer privacy and security. Those services often require 
connecting people who sit on different sides of the globe, yet 
need access to the same data. And that requires moving data 
between countries and across legal systems.
    As individuals, we rely on data transfers in our jobs and 
lives every day without even thinking about it. It might be the 
H.R. system that ensures you are paid on time. It might be your 
company's e-mail contacts that includes colleagues that are 
abroad. It might be your credit card which checks for and stops 
fraudulent transactions. Data transfers are foundational to any 
business with employees, customers, vendors, or locations 
outside the United States. For example, farmers use global data 
to understand weather patterns and soil conditions around the 
world to increase their crop yields and lower their cost. 
Similarly, manufacturers use data from factory floors across 
the world to monitor the safety and performance of their 
machines. It is difficult to overstate the importance of cross-
border data transfers to U.S. consumers, U.S. businesses of all 
sizes and sectors, and the entire U.S. economy, particularly in 
light of COVID.
    The crosscutting importance of this issue led BSA to launch 
a new initiative earlier this year, the Global Data Alliance, 
that brings together companies and a range of industries who 
are united by the importance of transferring data across 
borders in a manner that strongly protects personal privacy. At 
BSA, we represent the enterprise software perspective and our 
members create the technology that other businesses use. Those 
businesses trust BSA members to maintain the privacy and 
security of their most sensitive data, and our companies work 
hard to earn that trust. I want to emphasize that there should 
be no tradeoff between the need to transfer data and the need 
to protect the privacy of that data. Both are essential. In our 
view, personal data should only be transferred or used in any 
way with real effective privacy protections.
    BSA also supports strong privacy legislation. I was honored 
to testify before this committee at the beginning of this 
Congress on privacy legislation. And I want to thank Chairman 
Wicker, Ranking Member Cantwell, and Senators Moran, 
Blumenthal, Thune, Schatz, Markey, Klobuchar and others for 
their hard work and leadership to develop concrete proposals 
that will form the basis for passing privacy legislation next 
year. While I have focused on the ability to send data across 
borders in general, today's hearing focuses on the specific and 
importance of transfers, those between the United States and 
the European Union.
    The EU requires transferring personal data use a transfer 
mechanism. The U.S.-EU Privacy Shield was for many years a 
trusted way to do this. When the Privacy Shield and other 
transfer mechanisms were challenged in the European court, BSA 
participated as an amicus alongside the U.S. Government and the 
European Commission. This July, the Court of Justice of the 
European Union invalidated the Privacy Shield in its so-called 
Schrems II decision that had an immediate impact on 5,300, 
mostly small and medium sized businesses that relied on the 
Privacy Shield.
    I want to emphasize that the decision did not question the 
privacy practices of the companies participating in the Privacy 
Shield. The court also upheld the use of standard contractual 
clauses, which will become even stronger when a new U.S.-EU 
agreement is reached. We applaud the quick response by 
policymakers on both sides of the Atlantic. I want to thank Mr. 
Sullivan and Commissioner Philips for their immediate response. 
We particularly appreciate the leadership efforts by this 
committee and the strong, bipartisan, bicameral support. 
Chairman Wicker, Ranking Member Cantwell, thank you for the 
letter that you and your House counterparts sent to the FTC and 
Commerce shortly after the court's decision.
    In addition to these urgent near-term efforts, I want to 
encourage this committee to think boldly about longer term, 
sustainable ways to address the underlying intelligence 
gathering issues, and to work toward building consensus among 
like-minded countries. We all realize that some amount of 
signals intelligence is necessary in a democratic society to 
ensure safety and security.
    The question is, what guardrails and safeguards are needed? 
Building mutual recognition around these issues is vital over 
the long term. BSA stands ready to work with the Committee on 
promoting reliable and secure mechanisms for international data 
transfers. And I look forward to your questions.
    [The prepared statement of Ms. Espinel follows:]

     Prepared Statement of Victoria A. Espinel, President and CEO, 
                      BSA | The Software Alliance
    Good morning Chairman Wicker, Ranking Member Cantwell, and members 
of the Committee. My name is Victoria A. Espinel. I am President and 
CEO of BSA | The Software Alliance (``BSA'').
    BSA is the leading advocate for the global software industry.\1\ 
Our members are at the forefront of developing cutting-edge, data-
driven services that have a significant impact on U.S. job creation and 
growing the global economy. I commend the Committee for holding this 
hearing on the important topic of transatlantic data transfers and the 
EU-US Privacy Shield Framework (``Privacy Shield''), and I thank you 
for the opportunity to testify.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ BSA | The Software Alliance (www.bsa.org) is the leading 
advocate for the global software industry before governments and in the 
international marketplace. Its members are among the world's most 
innovative companies, creating software solutions that spark the 
economy and improve modern life. With headquarters in Washington, DC, 
and operations in more than 30 countries, BSA pioneers compliance 
programs that promote legal software use and advocates for public 
policies that foster technology innovation and drive growth in the 
digital economy. BSA's members include: Adobe, Atlassian, Autodesk, 
Bentley Systems, Box, Cadence, CNC/Mastercam, DocuSign, IBM, 
Informatica, Intel, MathWorks, Microsoft, Okta, Oracle, PTC, 
Salesforce, ServiceNow, Siemens Industry Software Inc., Sitecore, 
Slack, Splunk, Trend Micro, Trimble Solutions Corporation, Twilio, and 
Workday.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Cross-border data transfers are critical to the success of a broad 
range of companies, of all sizes and industries, and to consumers on 
both sides of the Atlantic. For that reason, the issues before this 
Committee reach far beyond the technology sector. Companies large and 
small, across the entire U.S. economy, depend on services that send 
data across international borders.
    BSA represents the perspective of enterprise software companies. 
Our members create the technology products and services that help other 
businesses innovate and grow. Businesses trust BSA members to maintain 
the privacy and security of their most sensitive data, including 
personal information. Those businesses--in sectors as diverse as 
agriculture, healthcare, manufacturing, and banking--produce a broad 
range of products and services and are united by the need to send data 
across international borders. Indeed, everyday technologies like cloud 
storage services, customer relationship management software, human 
resource management programs, identity management services, workplace 
collaboration software, and supply chain management services all depend 
on the ability to transfer data across national boundaries.
    Transferring data across borders is not only vital to businesses, 
but also to consumers and workers. In our professional lives, we 
transfer data when we send e-mails to colleagues, manage staff and 
budgets, attend videoconferences, and in thousands of other routine 
business activities. In our personal lives, we transfer data across 
borders when we engage in e-commerce or use messaging platforms to stay 
in touch with friends and relatives overseas. In each of these 
scenarios, we rightly expect to use global services that can connect us 
with others worldwide--in a manner that protects the privacy and 
security of our data.
    These issues are even more important amid the COVID-19 pandemic, as 
companies across the economy rely more heavily on remote workplace 
tools and cloud-based technologies that help employees remain 
productive while working outside of their physical offices. Online 
tools are also opening new avenues for medical researchers, hospitals, 
and pharmaceutical companies to coordinate research and treatment 
efforts, and for regulators to more quickly and accurately assess 
potential vaccines and treatments. Small businesses are increasingly 
serving customers not only in physical stores but also through online 
models that let them reach customers worldwide. As individuals, we are 
also shifting our lives even further online--whether it is to buy goods 
and services or to gather with relatives and friends.
    In short, it is difficult to overstate the importance of cross-
border data transfers to U.S. consumers, businesses of all sizes and 
sectors, and the entire economy. That is why I want to focus my 
testimony on the need to ensure companies can continue transferring 
data across international borders, so they can provide the products and 
services their customers demand, in a way that respects the privacy and 
security of the transferred data.
    Today's hearing focuses on the Privacy Shield, which until recently 
served as a privacy-protective way for companies to transfer data from 
the EU to the United States, consistent with EU legal requirements and 
privacy expectations of EU and U.S. citizens. The Privacy Shield was 
invalidated in July, when the Court of Justice of the European Union 
(``CJEU'') issued its decision in Schrems II. We applaud the swift 
response to that decision by policymakers on both sides of the Atlantic 
and their shared recognition that a new agreement is needed to replace 
the Privacy Shield. In particular, I would like to thank Chairman 
Wicker and Ranking Member Cantwell for leading a bipartisan and 
bicameral letter shortly after the Court's decision. Your efforts 
helpfully demonstrated strong congressional support for the 
Administration to negotiate with the European Commission to ensure data 
flows are not unduly disrupted. We welcome this Committee's efforts to 
continue supporting the important work of developing a successor to the 
Privacy Shield, to provide a responsible way for companies to transfer 
data across the Atlantic. At the same time, along with these important 
near-term efforts, we also encourage the Committee to think boldly 
about longer-term, sustainable ways to address the underlying issues 
about intelligence gathering and privacy--and to work toward building 
consensus on those issues among like-minded countries.
The Ability to Send Data Across International Borders is Critical to 
        Consumers and Companies Worldwide
    International data transfers are an essential part of modern-day 
commerce. They underpin a wide range of everyday business activities. 
For instance, when an employee joins a video conference with an 
overseas customer, shares documents with colleagues in a foreign 
office, sends an order to a supplier in another country, or simply 
communicates online with someone overseas, that person invariably 
engages in the cross-border transfer of data. As just one example, 
modern IT support offered on a 24-hour/7-days-a-week basis--which 
became critical for many companies even before the current pandemic--
would be impossible without the ability to transfer data across 
borders. Robust cybersecurity likewise relies on sharing data to help 
companies quickly identify and respond to threats that, by their 
nature, do not respect national borders. Indeed, sharing information on 
how bad actors in one country attempted to breach a system can help 
companies in other countries thwart similar efforts.
    International data transfers are an essential component of products 
and services across industries. For example:

   Detecting fraud. Cross-border data flows help stop credit 
        card fraud on a global scale. By efficiently transmitting data 
        across borders, banks can detect and block fraud attempts in a 
        matter of seconds, regardless of where a purchase is attempted. 
        This process has prevented billions of dollars in losses to 
        online fraudsters.

   Healthcare. Cross-border data transfers allow healthcare 
        facilities to make treatments more effective by using clinical 
        support software that analyzes electronic medical records, 
        insurance claims, and datasets across a large and diverse 
        sample size. It can also enable digitized medical images to be 
        shared with non-local specialists for consultations anywhere in 
        the world, improving the quality of medical care regardless of 
        where a patient lives.

   E-commerce. Cross-border data flows are at the heart of e-
        commerce. Retailers send data across borders when they check 
        inventory in an overseas warehouse, accept and process customer 
        orders, and enable customers to track shipments en route to 
        their destination.

   Human resources management. Global companies across 
        industries rely on cloud-based human resources systems to hire 
        employees and conduct performance reviews, and to administer 
        benefits and payroll across offices in different countries. The 
        ability to send data across national borders is critical to 
        ensuring companies can coordinate personnel management across a 
        multi-national workforce.

    In short, it is difficult to conceive of how commerce in the modern 
economy could continue to function without the ability to transfer data 
across international borders. And, in BSA's view, personal data should 
only be transferred--or used in any way--with real, effective privacy 
protections. BSA sees no tradeoff between data transfers and data 
privacy--both are essential. Indeed, BSA has long called for Congress 
to pass a clear and comprehensive national law that gives consumers 
meaningful rights over their personal data; imposes obligations on 
companies to safeguard consumers' data and prevent misuse; and provides 
strong, consistent enforcement. In all of these conversations, ensuring 
that companies handle data in privacy-protective ways that honor 
consumers' expectations is paramount.
    Cross border data transfers are critical across all industry 
sectors. They are also vital to the ability of U.S. companies to grow 
and compete worldwide. Although most data transfers today involve 
digital products and services, it would be a mistake to view 
international data transfers as an issue unique to technology 
companies. Global companies of all sizes in every industry rely on 
cross-border data transfers to conduct business, innovate, and compete 
more effectively. Data transfers are estimated to contribute $2.8 
trillion to global GDP--a share that exceeds the global trade in goods 
and is expected to grow to $11 trillion by 2025.\2\ This value is 
shared by traditional industries like agriculture, logistics, and 
manufacturing, which realize 75 percent of the value of the 
Internet.\3\ U.S. companies of all sizes and industry sectors must be 
able to transfer data across borders to complete in a global market.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \2\ OECD, Measuring the Economic Value of Data and Cross-Border 
Data Flows, 297 OECD Digital Economy Papers 24 (Aug. 2020), https://
www.oecd-ilibrary.org/docserver/6345995e-
en.pdf?expires=1606762530&id=id&accname=guest&checksum=E07406A96BD78AB99
291D0F7D
411F923.
    \3\ McKinsey Global Institute, Internet Matters: The Net's Sweeping 
Impact on Growth, Jobs, and Prosperity (May 2011), https://
www.mckinsey.com//media/McKinsey/Industries/Techno
logy%20Media%20and%20Telecommunications/High%20Tech/Our%20Insights/
Internet%20mat
ters/MGI_internet_matters_full_report.ashx.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Indeed, the cross-cutting importance of this issue spurred BSA to 
launch a new initiative earlier this year--the Global Data Alliance--
bringing together companies in industries ranging from consumer goods 
to healthcare to aerospace technology. Members of the Global Data 
Alliance provide a diverse range of products and services, serve 
different types of customers, and operate in different geographic 
markets--and they all recognize the critical importance of transferring 
data across borders in a manner that strongly protects personal 
privacy.
    We also should recognize the ultimate beneficiaries of enabling 
data to travel freely across borders are consumers. Organizations that 
rely on cross-border data flows produce the food we eat, the cars we 
drive, the medicines we take, the clothing we wear, and the myriad 
other goods and services we enjoy. Consumers also depend on these 
transfers when communicating with loved ones abroad, engaging in 
banking transactions, and purchasing goods online. The benefits to 
individuals of online services has been particularly apparent during 
the COVID-19 pandemic, with studies indicating 50 percent of U.S. 
employees are working remotely.\4\ Moreover, global collaboration 
between researchers, hospitals, and regulators has been critical to the 
development and testing of treatments and vaccines for COVID-19.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \4\ Global Data Alliance, Cross-Border Data Transfers & Remote Work 
at 2 (Oct. 5, 2020), https://www.globaldataalliance.org/downloads/
10052020cbdtremotework.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The importance of cross-border data transfers to the economy will 
only grow. By 2022, 60 percent of global GDP is expected to be 
digitized, with growth in every industry driven by data flows and 
digital technology.\5\ By 2025, six billion consumers--amounting to 
over 75 percent of the world's population--are predicted to be 
digitally connected, through over 25 billion connected devices.\6\ 
Ensuring data transfers can happen securely and reliably is therefore 
fundamental not only to current economic growth, but also to future 
prosperity.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \5\ Daniel D. Hamilton & Joseph P. Quinlan, The Transatlantic 
Economy 2020 at 28 (2020), https://transatlanticrelations.org/
publications/transatlantic-economy-2020/ (``The Transatlantic Economy 
2020'').
    \6\ Global Data Alliance, Cross-Border Data Transfer Facts and 
Figures, https://globaldata
alliance.org/downloads/gdafactsandfigures.pdf (``GDA Facts and 
Figures'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Transatlantic data transfers are particularly important.\7\ Data 
transfers to the EU account for about 50 percent of U.S. data 
transfers, while data transfers to the United States account for an 
even greater share of EU data transfers.\8\ These data flows are 
support the roughly $312 billion in annual U.S. services exports to 
Europe.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \7\ Recent studies indicate transatlantic cables carry 55 percent 
more data than transpacific routes, and the quantity of these 
transatlantic data transfers are growing rapidly. The Transatlantic 
Economy 2020 at 41.
    \8\ BSA | The Software Alliance, The Future of Transatlantic Data 
Flows at 1 (Sept. 23, 2020), https://www.bsa.org/files/policy-filings/
bsa_transatlanticdataflows.pdf (``BSA Transatlantic Data Flows'').
    \9\ The Transatlantic Economy 2020 at iii.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    These numbers underscore a simple but critically important fact: 
maintaining stable and secure mechanisms for data transfers between the 
United States and the European Union is essential to the success of 
both economies, and to the global economy more broadly.
II. EU-US Data Transfers: The Need for Reliable, Privacy-Protective 
        Mechanisms
    The need for specific legal mechanisms to transfer data across the 
Atlantic is rooted in EU law, and is currently embodied in the EU's 
General Data Protection Regulation (``GDPR''). Under the GDPR, 
companies may only transfer personal data from the EU to another 
country if the country has been deemed to provide an ``adequate'' level 
of privacy protection, or if the data is transferred pursuant to a 
legal mechanism recognized by the GDPR.\10\ The European Commission has 
only recognized twelve countries as providing an ``adequate'' level of 
protection. When data is transferred to other countries, then, 
companies must use another legal mechanism recognized by the GDPR.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \10\ See GDPR, Chapter V. The GDPR took effect in May 2018; the 
EU's prior data protection law similarly restricted the transfer of 
personal data to third countries. See Directive 95/46/EC.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The Privacy Shield created a way for companies to transfer data to 
the U.S. under privacy-protective principles the EU deemed 
``adequate.'' By invalidating the Privacy Shield, the Schrems II 
judgment has created an urgent need for a new mechanism for 
transatlantic data transfers.
    Transfer Mechanisms. The GDPR recognizes several legal mechanisms 
for transferring data across borders, including Standard Contractual 
Clauses (``SCCs'') and Binding Corporate Rules (``BCRs'').\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \11\ The other mechanisms include legally binding instruments 
between public authorities; codes of conduct; and approved 
certifications. The GDPR also permits companies to transfer data 
pursuant to derogations for limited, specific situations.

   Standard Contractual Clauses. SCCs are a standardized set of 
        contractual obligations that companies can adopt when 
        transferring data outside the EU. The SCCs are approved by the 
        European Commission and reflect commitments that implement EU 
        legal requirements to safeguard data. Companies that transfer 
        data pursuant to SCCs typically include the Commission-approved 
        contract language in all of their relevant contracts with 
        suppliers and other vendors. SCCs are widely used, and they 
        underpin transfers of personal data from the EU not only to the 
        US, but to more than 180 countries. In 2019, one survey found 
        that nearly 90 percent of companies that transferred data 
        outside of the EU relied on SCCs.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \12\ IAPP-EY Annual Governance Report 2019 (Nov. 6, 2019), https://
iapp.org/resources/article/iapp-ey-annual-governance-report-2019/ 
(survey of 370 companies)

   Binding Corporate Rules. BCRs are corporate rules that 
        govern international data transfers within a company. The GDPR 
        sets out a list of topics that must be addressed by BCRs, which 
        must specify how the company will apply certain data protection 
        principles and data subject rights to the transferred data. 
        BCRs may take several years to develop and must be approved by 
        a data protection authority in the EU before they can take 
        effect. Even so, their use is limited to a specific set of 
        intra-company transfers; BCRs accordingly do not provide a 
        basis for transferring data to third parties, such as 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
        customers, partners, or suppliers.

    Privacy Shield. The Privacy Shield provided an important and cost-
effective alternative mechanism for transferring data from the EU to 
the United States. It was negotiated by the U.S. Government and the 
European Commission to allow companies to commit to privacy principles 
that ensured data transferred to the U.S. was ``adequately'' protected. 
As a result, transfers under the Privacy Shield were deemed 
``adequate''--thus allowing companies to transfer data from the EU to 
the U.S. under the Privacy Shield program without using other 
mechanisms such as SCCs or BCRs.
    The Privacy Shield established a voluntary program for companies to 
transfer data--but once a company publicly committed to comply with its 
requirements, that commitment becomes enforceable by the Federal Trade 
Commission. Companies that participate in the Privacy Shield therefore 
commit to handle data transferred from the EU to the U.S. in line with 
seven privacy-protective principles on notice, choice, onward 
transfers, security, data integrity and purpose limitation, access, and 
enforcement. Participants also adhere to sixteen supplemental 
principles, which address additional protections for sensitive data and 
dispute resolution, among other issues. To help ensure these 
protections remained meaningful in light of changes involving 
technologies and developments in EU or U.S. law, the Privacy Shield 
created an internal review mechanism for the United States and the EU 
to update the Privacy Shield over time. Its most recent annual review, 
released in October 2019, confirmed that the Privacy Shield remained a 
trusted mechanism for companies and individuals alike.\13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \13\ European Commission, Report from the Commission to the 
European Parliament and The Council on the Third Annual Review of the 
Functioning of the EU-U.S. Privacy Shield, Oct. 23, 2019, https://
ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/
report_on_the_third_annual_review_of_the_eu_
us_privacy_shield_2019.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The Privacy Shield program was well-used, particularly by small- 
and medium-sized entities transferring data from the EU. Over 5,300 
organizations, in industries ranging from manufacturing to hospitality, 
participated in the Privacy Shield program,\14\ and more than 70 
percent of those companies were small- or medium-sized businesses.\15\ 
Its benefits reached more broadly, though, to the networks of suppliers 
and customers that depended on these Privacy Shield-certified 
companies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \14\ Congressional Research Service, U.S.-EU Privacy Shield (Aug. 
6, 2020), https://fas.org/sgp/crs/row/IF11613.pdf.
    \15\ US Department of Commerce Department, Commerce Secretary 
Wilbur Ross Welcomes Privacy Shield Milestone-Privacy Shield Has 
Reached 5,000 Active Company Participants (Sept. 11, 2019), https://
www.trade.gov/press-release/commerce-secretary-wilbur-ross-welcomes-
privacy-shield-milestone-privacy-shield-has.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The U.S. Government also made significant commitments in connection 
with the Privacy Shield, to address the protection of data transferred 
under the program. These include not only the annual review mechanism 
discussed above, but also the establishment of an ombudsperson 
mechanism, which was designed to respond to requests by EU individuals 
regarding U.S. signals intelligence practices.\16\ Officials at the 
U.S. Department of Justice and the Office of the Director of National 
Intelligence also described the many limitations and safeguards 
applicable to U.S. government access for law enforcement and for 
national security purposes.\17\ These include Presidential Policy 
Directive 28 (``PPD-28''), which was issued in 2014 to set out 
principles and requirements that apply to all U.S. signals intelligence 
activities. In addition to these commitments, the U.S. Privacy and 
Civil Liberties Oversight Board has issued oversight reports or 
conducted oversight reviews of many of these national security 
authorities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \16\ See John F. Kerry, Letter to Commissioner Jourova (July 7, 
2016), https://www.privacy
shield.gov/servlet/servlet.FileDownload?file=015t00000004q0b.
    \17\ See Bruce C. Schwartz, Letter to Justin Antonipillai and Ted 
Dean (Feb. 19, 2016), https://www.privacyshield.gov/servlet/
servlet.FileDownload?file=015t00000004q0W; Robert Litt, Letter to 
Justin Antonipillai and Ted Dean (Feb. 22, 2016), https://
www.privacyshield.gov/servlet/
servlet.FileDownload?file=015t00000004q1F; and Robert Litt, Letter to 
Justin Antonipillai and Ted Dean (June 21, 2016), https://
www.privacyshield.gov/servlet/servlet.FileDownload?file
=015t00000004q1A.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Schrems II Litigation. The Schrems II decision arose after a series 
of complaints filed by Max Schrems, who in 2013 challenged the 
predecessor to the Privacy Shield, which was known as the Safe Harbor. 
In October 2015, the CJEU annulled the Safe Harbor, creating the need 
for the U.S. and EU to negotiate the Privacy Shield. Later the same 
year, Schrems filed a reformulated complaint challenging the ability of 
Facebook to transfer data from the EU to the U.S. using SCCs. Even 
though the reformulated complaint centered on the use of SCCs, 
proceedings before both the Irish High Court and the CJEU sparked 
substantial discussion on the Privacy Shield.
    BSA participated in the Schrems II litigation as an amicus curiae. 
We argued before the CJEU, asking it to uphold the SCCs and not address 
the Privacy Shield, which we felt it did not need to reach in order to 
decide that case. Throughout the litigation, BSA emphasized SCCs are 
intended to support transfers to jurisdictions the European Commission 
has not already deemed ``adequate''--and therefore companies using the 
SCCs should focus on the protections provided by those clauses rather 
than on the protections offered by the laws of the third country to 
which data is exported.
    In July 2020, the CJEU's Schrems II decision invalidated the 
Privacy Shield, taking away this critical mechanism for transferring 
data.\18\ Importantly, the CJEU did not take issue with the privacy 
practices of companies that use the Privacy Shield. Rather, the Court 
based its decision on U.S. intelligence practices it found were not 
consistent with the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights. The Court focused 
specifically on signals and intelligence collection under Executive 
Order 12333 and Section 702 of the FISA Amendments Act of 2008.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \18\ Case C-311/18, Data Protection Commissioner v. Facebook 
Ireland Ltd, Maximillian Schrems (Schrems II),  180-85, 191-92, 197-
201 (July 16, 2020).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    At the same time, the CJEU upheld the validity of SCCs. While we 
agree with the European Commission and the U.S. Government that the 
safeguards and commitments contained in the Privacy Shield should have 
been sufficient, we were pleased the Court affirmed the validity of 
SCCs. Like BCRs, SCCs can create commercial privacy protections beyond 
those included in the Privacy Shield, because companies may use them to 
make additional binding commitments.\19\ For companies using SCCs, the 
CJEU stressed the need to determine, on a case-by-case basis and in 
light of all the circumstances of the transfer, including any 
additional safeguards that parties may add to SCCs, whether the data 
can be protected adequately. We agree with that approach. In October, 
BSA published a set of principles to guide companies in developing 
additional safeguards for EU-US data transfers. The principles can be 
turned into specific clauses appropriate to the specific nature of the 
transfer.\20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \19\ In fact, BSA members were making commitments beyond what is 
included in Commission-approved SCCs before the Schrems II case began.
    \20\ BSA | The Software Alliance, Principles: Additional Safeguard 
for SCC Transfers (Oct. 2020), https://www.bsa.org/files/policy-
filings/10222020bsascctransfers.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Last month, the European Data Protection Board (``EDPB''), which 
comprises representatives of the national data protection authorities 
within the European Union, published draft recommendations for the use 
of SCCs for transferring data. We understand the concern many companies 
have raised about whether the recommendations would effectively 
prohibit transfers to the US. We appreciate that the EDPB has opened 
its recommendations to public comment. We also respect the difficulty 
of providing examples that account for all of the circumstances of all 
data transfers. We remain optimistic the draft recommendations can be 
revised to better reflect the CJEU's judgment, which envisions greater 
flexibility and use of additional safeguards to protect privacy. For 
example, the CJEU's decision directs companies to consider ``all'' 
circumstances of a transfer in determining whether additional 
safeguards are appropriate to supplement SCCs. The full set of relevant 
circumstances may include the nature of the data transferred and the 
likelihood of government access to that data, yet the range of these 
circumstances are not fully reflected in the current draft 
recommendations.
    Despite the widespread use of SCCs, we should not forget that the 
use of SCCs creates burdens, particularly on smaller businesses that 
may be forced to re-negotiate all of their relevant contracts to 
include terms of SCCs. This option should therefore not be viewed as a 
replacement for the Privacy Shield. Given the breadth and diversity of 
companies that rely on transatlantic data transfers, it is imperative 
to ensure there are multiple practical and privacy-protective ways for 
companies to transfer data.
III. There is Broad Support for the U.S. Government and the European 
        Commission to Develop an Enhanced Privacy Shield
    We commend the U.S. Government and the European Commission for 
recognizing the need for a new agreement to improve on the Privacy 
Shield. Shortly after the CJEU's judgment, the Department of Commerce 
and the European Commission jointly announced the initiation of 
discussions to evaluate the potential for an enhanced Privacy Shield 
framework.\21\ In doing so, both governments ``recognize[d] the vital 
importance of data protection and the significance of cross-border data 
transfers to our citizens and economies,'' and stressed their mutual 
commitment to supporting privacy, the rule of law, and the close 
economic relationship between the United States and Europe.\22\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \21\ Joint Press Statement from U.S. Secretary of Commerce Wilbur 
Ross and European Commissioner for Justice Didier Reynders (Aug. 10, 
2020), https://www.commerce.gov/news/press-releases/2020/08/joint-
press-statement-us-secretary-commerce-wilbur-ross-and-european.
    \22\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    These efforts have strong bipartisan, bicameral support. Again, we 
very much appreciate the letter Chairman Wicker and Ranking Member 
Cantwell sent after the Schrems II decision to the Commerce Department 
and the Federal Trade Commission, along with your counterparts on the 
House Energy and Commerce Committee, encouraging them to work closely 
with the European Commission to develop a new data transfer mechanism 
to replace the Privacy Shield.\23\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \23\ Letter from Senator Roger Wicker et al., to Secretary Wilbur 
Ross & Chairman Joseph Simons (Aug. 5, 2020), https://
energycommerce.house.gov/sites/democrats.energycommerce.house
.gov/files/documents/
FTC.DOC.2020.8.5.%20Letter%20re%20Privacy%20Shield%20ECJ%20De
cision.CPC_.pdf. In addition, several members of the House of 
Representatives, led by Representatives Welch, LaHood, and DelBene, 
have echoed this support. Letter from Representative Peter Welch et 
al., to Secretary Wilbur Ross & Chairman Joseph Simons (Oct. 2, 2020), 
https://www.bsa.org/files/policy-filings/
10022020congresslettersupportprivacyshield.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    All sectors of the U.S. economy have also demonstrated support for 
this effort to reach an improved agreement. BSA and the U.S. Chamber of 
Commerce led a letter signed by dozens of trade associations spanning a 
broad range of industries, which together encouraged the U.S. 
Government to work collaboratively with its EU counterparts to develop 
a stable and sustainable mechanism to replace the Privacy Shield.\24\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \24\ Letter from BSA | The Software Alliance et al., to Secretary 
Wilbur Ross (July 17, 2020), https://www.bsa.org/files/policy-filings/
07172020multiindustryresponselettertoschremsii.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The U.S. Government and the European Commission have also 
repeatedly expressed their support for the Privacy Shield framework. 
Prior to the Court's judgment in Schrems II, European regulators 
described the Privacy Shield as a ``success story,'' that offered 
strong privacy protections to EU data subjects and exemplified the 
productive partnership between the EU and U.S. governments.\25\ In the 
Schrems II litigation, both the U.S. Government and the European 
Commission argued in support of the Privacy Shield, stressing its 
importance to both sides of the Atlantic. As an amicus in Schrems II 
and in a separate challenge to the Privacy Shield, BSA argued in 
support of the Commission and of the Privacy Shield. Moreover, at BSA, 
we have a longstanding relationship with the European Commission and 
are committed to working collaboratively and closely with them to 
address the need for robust data transfer mechanisms and find long-term 
solutions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \25\ European Commission, EU-U.S. Privacy Shield: Third Review 
Welcomes Progress While Identifying Steps for Improvement (Oct. 23, 
2019), https://ec.europa.eu/commission/press
corner/detail/en/IP_19_6134.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    We are confident the U.S. Government and the European Commission 
can work together to develop an enhanced successor to the Privacy 
Shield. In its decision invalidating the Privacy Shield, the CJEU 
focused on concerns around two specific U.S. intelligence-gathering 
programs, including whether those programs appropriately safeguard 
privacy and fundamental rights, whether they are subject to independent 
oversight, and whether they provide EU data subjects with rights to 
judicial redress. Given the targeted nature of the Court's concerns, we 
are optimistic the U.S. Government and European Commission can work 
together to address them. Indeed, it is important to recognize the CJEU 
expressed no concerns about the adequacy of the privacy protections 
imposed on commercial entities by the Privacy Shield. Developing an 
enhanced Privacy Shield should not require a complete overhaul of the 
existing model but instead should address the specific concerns 
highlighted in the Schrems II judgment. We fully support those efforts 
and stand ready to provide whatever assistance we can.
IV. Over the Long Term, Countries Must Work Together to Recognize 
        Shared Values on Appropriate Safeguards for Intelligence 
        Practices
    The ongoing work by the Administration and the European Commission 
to develop an enhanced Privacy Shield is urgent, and we appreciate 
their constructive approach and this Committee's focus on the issue. 
Creating a new and enhanced mechanism for such transfers is vital to 
the continued prosperity of both the United States and Europe.
    We also urge this Committee, the U.S. Government, and all like-
minded democratic societies interested in both security and civil 
liberties to think boldly about longer-term approaches to security 
safeguards. Even the CJEU recognizes some amount of signals 
intelligence is necessary in a democratic society to ensure safety and 
security. The question is what guardrails and safeguards are needed.
    The U.S. Government has, to its credit, publicly released 
significant guidance about safeguards and oversight mechanisms. It is 
well positioned to lead a conversation with other governments about the 
appropriate use of safeguards to protect privacy and fundamental 
rights, the level of independent oversight, and the ability of 
individuals to obtain redress for violations. A common understanding on 
best practices will improve transparency among America's allies and 
decrease future transatlantic data conflicts.
    We have full confidence the U.S. Government and the European 
Commission can address these issues in the context of developing a 
successor to the Privacy Shield. At the same time, we recognize 
commitments and agreements addressing such practices are more durable 
when they reflect a broader consensus of America and its allies on the 
appropriate scope of intelligence-gathering practices.
    We accordingly encourage the U.S. Government to work with like-
minded democratic countries to build a mutual recognition that many 
countries already share a set of values on the appropriate safeguards 
for intelligence-collection activities. For example, we support the 
U.S. Government working toward diplomatic agreements with countries 
that share our commitment to democracy and the rule of law, to set out 
a mutual understanding of the types of safeguards appropriate for 
intelligence-gathering activities to ensure respect for the privacy and 
fundamental rights of individuals. We do not underestimate the 
potential magnitude of such an effort, or the challenges it might 
present. But we believe U.S. leadership on this issue will both 
strengthen U.S. economic interests, and ensure the United States and 
its allies can are aligned in promoting economic growth based on the 
principles of freedom, security, democratic values, and human rights 
across the globe.
                                 * * *
    Thank you again for the opportunity to testify at today's hearing. 
BSA looks forward to working with the Committee on promoting reliable 
and secure mechanisms for international data transfers.

    The Chairman. Thank you very much. Since you mentioned the 
letter, Ms. Espinel, I think we should insert it in the record 
at this point. So I ask unanimous consent that the letter dated 
August 5, 2020 to Honorable Wilbur Ross and Honorable Joseph 
Simons and signed by Frank Pallone Jr., Greg Walden, Roger F. 
Wicker, and Maria Cantwell be admitted into the record at this 
point.
    [The letter referred to was unavailable at time of 
printing.]
    The Chairman. Thank you very much. And Mr. Swire, you are 
next.

         STATEMENT OF PETER SWIRE, ELIZABETH AND TOMMY

        HOLDER CHAIR OF LAW AND ETHICS, SCHELLER COLLEGE

          OF BUSINESS, GEORGIA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY

    Mr. Swire. Chairman Wicker, Ranking Member Cantwell, and 
members of the Committee for the opportunity to testify today. 
My name is Peter Swire. I am a Professor at Georgia Tech and 
Research Director of the Cross-border Data Forum. I have been 
working on these issues for quite a while. I wrote a book in 
1998 for Brookings on EU-U.S. data privacy fights and have been 
working on that in some ways ever since. For the Schrems trial 
in Ireland, I submitted testimony of over 300 pages. So I have 
been living this quite intensively for a long time----
    The Chairman. We won't put that in the record.
    [Laughter.]
    Mr. Swire. There is a nice link in the testimony, sir. This 
hearing is important in part to create a clear public record 
about these key issues. The part--one of my testimony makes 
eight specific points. The first is that the European Data 
Protection Board has issued draft guidance last month that is 
so strict it would massively cutoff data flows from the United 
States--from Europe to the United States. The second point is, 
a lot of these issues in Europe are constitutional law. And we 
know from the United States you can't go and amend the 
Constitution easily.
    So the U.S. has to be aware of their Constitutional 
restrictions as we negotiate eventual solutions. The third 
point, which has been mentioned by others, is the possibility 
here of strict data localization if the strict interpretations 
happen. And at the Cross-Border Data Forum, we are working on 
additional studies about how serious that would be. Point four 
is an appendix to my testimony that provides detailed proposals 
for one of the hard issues here. It is what is called 
``individual redress,'' the rules in Europe that there has to 
be somebody who can check to make sure the citizens' rights are 
protected.
    In August with Kenneth Propp, I wrote a proposal in Lawfare 
on this. There has been comments from a senior European lawyer 
on it. And in this testimony, I have new non-statutory 
approaches that presumably could be implemented pretty much 
immediately that would take big steps toward solving the 
individual redress problem, and I hope that will be considered 
quickly. Fifth point has to do with what is called 
``proportionality'' under European law, is there too much 
surveillance in the view of their judges. There is an Appendix 
to this testimony that lists all the surveillance updates, it 
is 25 pages, since 2016. It shows a very strong record in the 
United States, that safeguards that have been taken since 2016, 
since the Privacy Shield.
    So we have a record to explain to the Europeans the very 
strong safeguards that exist. A six point and I will take a 
little bit to expand on this, is that it is important to 
negotiate a deal, in my view, in the short term, hopefully 
before January 20. And I would suggest even a one-year deal 
that would then expire that meets the goals of both the 
European Union and the United States. For the EU, there have 
been reports in the press that they would like to have a 
broader negotiation on many issues, including privacy, with the 
new Administration.
    Having a year to negotiate this as part of a broader deal 
would meet important European goals. It would also help the 
European Union on its guidance, clarify things. It would allow 
additional work on significant U.S. actions, and it would 
provide time for Congress to see if there are specific statutes 
that might help. So even a one-year extension would provide a 
lot of room for what would then lead to presumably a longer 
term proposal that would build on the shorter term things. That 
might seem impossible, but having this issue negotiated in the 
first weeks of a new Administration would be very challenging.
    So getting something done soon before there is a cutoff of 
data flows creates a lot more room for better things down the 
road. In my testimony, the last part about Europe is that as 
the U.S. considers tough reforms on our side, we should at 
least understand what they can do on their side. What are their 
legal options for reform? Those haven't been considered very 
much in Europe yet, but that is a normal part of negotiations. 
I then have three points about the U.S. landscape. The first 
point, which is not fully understood in Europe, is how much 
continuity we have had on these issues. From the Obama 
Administration to the Trump Administration on Privacy Shield, 
on Presidential Directive 28, it has been continuity here, and 
we would expect the same from a new Biden Administration. So 
many things are very tough in a partisan world. In this one, 
there is a lot of agreement.
    A second point, which is also been made by others today, is 
that passing comprehensive commercial privacy legislation would 
help a great deal. That wouldn't directly address the 
surveillance issues, but the clear story from Europe is it 
would help the atmosphere. So if this committee in the Congress 
could pass a law in that direction, it would make a big 
difference. It is no small thing. I have worked around this 
city for a long time, but it would make a huge difference even 
to have, for instance, a committee bill reported out that 
showed progress would be a help in the negotiations.
    And then the last part of the testimony is why this 
Congress has a unique opportunity in my 25 years of working on 
these issues to pass comprehensive privacy legislation. Could I 
have perhaps 30 or 45 seconds to list a couple?
    The Chairman. Sure.
    Mr. Swire. OK. And you know better than I all the reasons 
this is impossible, but not getting there is also a great big 
problem. So one big reason for hope is the progress that the 
Chairman and the Ranking Member made in this Congress on a lot 
of provisions to narrow down the list of disagreements. A 
second reason is that industry concern about Europe has a 
strong reason to support legislation.
    A third reason that industry after the new California 
initiative has a strong reason to want to have some 
restrictions on additional things that are coming in from 
California. A fourth reason has to do with the favorite issue 
of preemption, and the testimony suggests one possible way that 
both sides of that difficult fight could have a victory on 
preemption, for instance, by allowing the current California 
privacy law to stay in place, but not having the new initiative 
go into effect.
    There would be some State action, but not other State 
action that might provide more room. And the last point is, in 
a Congress where bipartisan accomplishments are difficult, this 
is an issue where for business and for consumers, for 
Republicans and Democrats, there may actually be the 
possibility of bipartisan action.
    Thank you, Chairman and Ranking Member, for once again the 
opportunity for being here today.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Swire follows:]

 Prepared Statement by Peter Swire,\1\ Elizabeth & Tommy Holder Chair 
   of Law and Ethics Scheller College of Business, Georgia Institute 
                             of Technology
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ Elizabeth and Tommy Holder Chair of Law and Ethics, Georgia 
Tech Scheller College of Business; Research Director, Cross-Border Data 
Forum; senior counsel, Alston & Bird LLP. The opinions expressed here 
are my own, and should not be attributed to the Cross-Border Data Forum 
or any client.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Chairman Wicker, Ranking Member Cantwell, and Members of the 
Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today on ``The 
Invalidation of the EU-U.S. Privacy Shield and the Future of 
Transatlantic Data Flows.''
    I am Peter Swire, the Elizabeth and Tommy Holder Chair of Law and 
Ethics at the Scheller College of Business at Georgia Tech, and 
Research Director of the Cross-Border Data Forum. Since the mid-1990s I 
have worked intensively on the topic of data flows between the European 
Union (EU) and U.S., including as lead author of the 1998 book called 
``None Of Your Business: World Data Flows, Electronic Commerce, and the 
European Privacy Directive.'' I have worked on these issues as a 
government official and private citizen, and wrote expert testimony of 
over 300 pages for the 2017 trial in Ireland of the Schrems II case. A 
biography appears at the end of this testimony.
    This hearing is important in part to create a clear public record 
about these complex and important issues concerning the European Union, 
the United States, and international flows of ``personal data,'' which 
is often called PII or ``personally identifiable information'' in the 
U.S.
    Part I of this testimony offers observations on legal and policy 
issues in the European Union. Key points include:

  A.  The European Data Protection Board in November issued draft 
        guidance with an extremely strict interpretation of how to 
        implement the Schrems II case.

  B.  The decision in Schrems II is based on EU constitutional law. 
        There are varying current interpretations in Europe of what is 
        required by Schrems II, but constitutional requirements may 
        restrict the range of options available to EU and U.S. 
        policymakers.

  C.  Strict EU rules about data transfers, such as the draft EDPB 
        guidance, would appear to result in strict data localization, 
        creating numerous major issues for EU-and U.S.-based 
        businesses, as well as affecting many online activities of EU 
        individuals.

  D.  Appendix 1 to this testimony provides detailed proposals for one 
        of the requirements of the EU Charter--individual redress for 
        violation of rights in the U.S. surveillance system.

  E.  Along with concerns about lack of individual redress, the CJEU 
        found that the EU Commission had not established that U.S. 
        surveillance was ``proportionate'' in its scope and operation. 
        Appendix 2 to this testimony seeks to contribute to an informed 
        judgment on proportionality, by cataloguing developments in 
        U.S. surveillance safeguards since the Commission's issuance of 
        its Privacy Shield decision in 2016.

  F.  Negotiating an EU/U.S. adequacy agreement is important in the 
        short term.

  G.  A short-run agreement would assist in creating a better overall 
        long-run agreement or agreements.

  H.  As the U.S. considers its own possible legal reforms in the 
        aftermath of Schrems II, it is prudent and a normal part of 
        negotiations to seek to understand where the other party--the 
        EU--may have flexibility to reform its own laws.

    Part II of the testimony provides observations on the U.S. 
political and policy landscape:

  A.  Issues related to Schrems II have largely been bipartisan in the 
        U.S., with substantial continuity across the Obama and Trump 
        administrations, and expected as well for a Biden 
        administration.

  B.  Passing comprehensive privacy legislation would help considerably 
        in EU/U.S. negotiations.

  C.  This Congress may have a unique opportunity to enact 
        comprehensive commercial privacy legislation for the United 
        States.
PART I: Observations on Legal and Policy Issues in the European Union
    In the wake of the Schrems II decision very large data flows from 
the EU to the U.S. and other third countries may become unlawful. The 
likelihood and magnitude of such a blockage are uncertain, and depend 
significantly on how European actors interpret the Schrems II decision. 
With Kenneth Propp, I have written previously on the background of the 
Schrems II case, its holdings, and its geopolitical implications. In 
Part I of this testimony, I address legal and policy issues 
specifically about the EU.
A. The European Data Protection Board in November issued draft guidance 
        with an extremely strict interpretation of how to implement the 
        Schrems II case.
    An apparently very strict interpretation of Schrems II appears in 
two documents issued, subject to public comment, by the European Data 
Protection Board on November 11, 2020. My discussion here draws on the 
clear and expert three-part commentary of Professor Theodore Christakis 
in the European Law Blog. As the body of national data protection 
regulators, the EDPB's views are important due to its official role in 
interpreting the GDPR as well as language in the Schrems II decision 
about its role in defining what supplementary safeguards are sufficient 
for transfers outside of the EU.
    The EDPB issued its draft of the ``European Essential Guarantees 
for Surveillance Measures'' (``EEG Requirements''). This document 
summarized the fundamental rights jurisprudence of the European Court 
of Human Rights (housed in Strasbourg, and interpreting the European 
Convention on Human Rights) and the Court of Justice of the European 
Union (housed in Luxembourg, and interpreting European Union law 
including the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights). A key task of the EEG 
Requirements was to state the EDPB's understanding of what legal 
requirements a third country must have in order to ``offer a level of 
protection essentially equivalent to that guaranteed within the EU.'' 
To simplify the EDPB's main point--if a third country (such as the 
U.S.) meets the EEG Requirements, then the country can be seen as 
providing ``essentially equivalent'' protections; if not, then the 
country does not provide ``essentially equivalent'' protections, and 
transfers of personal data would require additional safeguards.
    Where ``essentially equivalent'' protections exist, then transfers 
to that country may be found ``adequate'' under EU law. This sort of 
``adequacy'' determination was made by the EU Commission in 2016 for 
the Privacy Shield. Eleven countries currently have this sort of 
adequacy determination by the EU Commission. A new EU/U.S. agreement 
would presumably be based on a similar adequacy finding.
    If an adequacy determination is not in place, then the Schrems II 
court stated that transfers from the EU to a third country can exist 
where ``supplementary measures'' or ``additional safeguards'' are in 
place. Along with the EEG Requirements, the EDPB released its 
``Recommendations on Supplementary Measures'' on November 11. Prior to 
the EDPB guidance, the U.S. government issued its ``White Paper'' on 
``Information on U.S. Privacy Safeguards Relevant to SCCs and Other EU 
Legal Bases for EU-U.S. Data Transfers after Schrems II.'' Other expert 
commentators published detailed studies of how additional safeguards, 
well implemented, could create a lawful basis for continuing to use 
Standard Contractual Clauses or other mechanisms for transferring 
personal data from the EU to third countries including the U.S.
    As Professor Christakis has explained, the EDPB interpreted the 
Schrems II decision to be far stricter than had the White Paper or 
other commentators. The EDPB's EEG Requirements are so strict, as 
Christakis wrote, that ``third countries might rarely if ever meet the 
EEG requirements.'' Data exporters, under the EDPB approach, would then 
have to rely on its Recommendations on Supplementary Measures. 
Christakis, however, found these are also exceptionally strict: ``To 
sum up, the EDPB's guidance clearly indicates that no data transfer 
should take place to non-adequate/non-essentially equivalent countries 
unless the data is so thoroughly encrypted or pseudonymised that it 
cannot be read by anyone in the recipient country, not even the 
intended recipient.''
B. The decision in Schrems II is based on EU constitutional law. There 
        are varying current interpretations in Europe of what is 
        required by Schrems II, but constitutional requirements may 
        restrict the range of options available to EU and U.S. 
        policymakers.
    There are important and as-yet unresolved disagreements among EU 
experts about how to interpret the Schrems II decision. Disagreements 
about constitutional law are certainly familiar to the Senators and 
American lawyers. That sort of disagreement is what exists in Europe in 
the aftermath of Schrems II.
    Much of the Schrems II decision relied on specific provisions in 
the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights, which came into force in 2009 
along with the Treaty of Lisbon:

  1.  Article 47 of the Charter addresses the right to an effective 
        remedy: ``Everyone whose rights and freedoms guaranteed by the 
        law of the Union are violated has the right to an effective 
        remedy before a tribunal.'' Appendix 1 to this testimony 
        examines issues arising under Article 47, notably what sorts of 
        individual redress the U.S. might provide for EU persons with 
        respect to U.S. surveillance practices.

  2.  Article 7 of the Charter addresses respect for privacy and family 
        life: ``Everyone has the right to respect for his or her 
        private and family life, home and communications.'' This right 
        to privacy is similar to the ``right to respect for private and 
        family life'' in Article 8 of the European Convention of Human 
        Rights, first signed in 1950.

  3.  Article 8 of the Charter is a data protection right. It states: 
        ``(1) Everyone has the right to the protection of personal data 
        concerning him or her; (2) Such data must be processed fairly 
        for specified purposes and on the basis of the consent of the 
        person concerned or some other legitimate basis laid down by 
        law. Everyone has the right of access to data which has been 
        collected concerning him or her, and the right to have it 
        rectified. (3) Compliance with these rules shall be subject to 
        control by an independent authority.''

    The EDPB guidance can illustrate the importance of how these 
fundamental rights protections will be interpreted after the Schrems II 
decision. To illustrate, suppose that each aspect of the draft EDPB 
guidance were required by the Charter of Fundamental Rights. In that 
instance, the European Union would have no legal authority to weaken 
constitutional protections, and the strict prohibitions on data 
transfers under the EDPB draft guidance would be required as a matter 
of EU constitutional law. Based on the review of that guidance by 
Professor Christakis, an enormous range of flows of personal data would 
be prohibited to the U.S., China, India and most or all other third 
countries in the world (except the small number with a current adequacy 
decision in place).
    The draft EDPB guidance, in fact, would appear to be clearly 
stricter than constitutionally required by the Schrems II decision. 
After all, the CJEU went to considerable lengths to say that transfers 
using Standard Contractual Clauses remained lawful where ``additional 
safeguards'' were in place; however, the EDPB guidance found no 
``additional safeguards'' that would enable access to the personal data 
in a third country. It appears that the EDPB draft guidance would 
render the CJEU's discussion of additional safeguards to be a nullity.
    Based on my discussions with other EU legal experts, many EU legal 
experts would find greater flexibility under EU constitutional law than 
provided by the EDPB draft guidance. Going forward, EU experts on 
fundamental rights will engage on what restrictions on data transfers 
are required by the Charter of Fundamental Rights, as contrasted with 
decisions of non-judicial officials.
    In conclusion on EU constitutional requirements, a very strict 
interpretation of the decision may leave limited options open for 
policymakers. Going forward, EU experts on fundamental rights will 
engage on what restrictions on data transfers are required by the 
Charter of Fundamental Rights, as contrasted with decisions of non-
judicial officials. Although the precise legal issues are different, 
the importance of constitutional doctrine is well known to U.S. 
lawmakers for free speech and other First Amendment issues. Members of 
this Committee will therefore understand that legal, constitutional 
limits may affect what the EU Commission, the European Parliament, and 
other EU institutions can do in the wake of the Schrems II decision.
C. Strict EU rules about data transfers, such as the draft EDPB 
        guidance, would appear to result in strict data localization, 
        creating numerous major issues for EU-and U.S.-based 
        businesses, as well as affecting many online activities of EU 
        individuals.
    The European Union will continue its own deliberations about how 
strict are the limits on data flows, as a matter of either EU policy 
choices or fundamental rights jurisprudence. I will briefly discuss 
some practical effects of a strict approach, which appear considerable.
    I will first address what one might call the ``boy who cried wolf'' 
theory. After all, concerns about EU cut-off of data have arisen 
repeatedly since the Data Protection Directive went into effect in 
1998. At that time, the EU/U.S. Safe Harbor, and other practical 
measures, enabled commerce to proceed without great hindrance. Later, 
in 2015, the CJEU issued the first Schrems decision, and privacy 
experts advised companies that data flows from the EU might be cut. 
Then, the EU and U.S. negotiated the Privacy Shield, and commerce 
continued. More recently, the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) 
went into effect in 2018, along with warnings that it could shut down 
numerous business models. In practice, after often-considerable 
compliance efforts, most business has been able to continue under GDPR. 
After these three rounds of warnings of disaster that didn't 
materialize, it would be easy for people to assume that the aftermath 
of Schrems II will once again be less impactful on data transfers than 
doomsayers cry out.
    My view, however, is that the possibility of major disruptions of 
data flows is far greater this time. The CJEU--the supreme court of 
Europe, whose decisions are binding on the member states--has 
reiterated its strong concerns about transferring data to countries 
whose surveillance systems fail to meet European standards. That same 
court would have the final word about any new EU-U.S. agreement, or any 
other legal mechanism that seeks to enable transfers to third 
countries. Depending on how one interprets the constitutional 
dimensions of Schrems II and the many other high court decisions 
examined by the EDPB, the apparent room for policymaker discretion now 
seems more limited. In addition, based on my discussions with 
knowledgeable persons, there is a significant possibility that one or 
more of the largest companies in the world may come under court order 
to stop transfers, before the January 20 U.S. presidential 
inauguration. In short, this time may fit the old story, where the boy 
cried wolf once again, but this time the wolf was really there.
    If many data transfers are cut off, then the effect would be data 
localization. The term ``local'' here would apply to the EU member 
states, the other countries in the European Economic Area, and the 
currently eleven countries that now have an adequacy determination. 
Transfers to the United Kingdom after the January 1, 2021 Brexit would 
appear to depend on the UK receiving an adequacy determination, which 
is currently being considered but has not been finalized.
    As the possibility of data localization increases, it becomes 
increasingly important for organizations to determine what it would 
mean to implement localization, and for policymakers to understand the 
effects of localization. The most detailed examination of such data 
flows, of which I am aware, remains the book that I wrote with Robert 
Litan in 1998, called ``None of Your Business: World Data Flows, 
Electronic Commerce, and the European Privacy Directive.'' Thanks to 
permission from its publisher, the Brookings Institution, that book is 
now downloadable from the Brookings website. Chapter 5 of the book 
addresses ``privacy issues affecting many organizations,'' such as 
human resources, auditing, business consulting, and customer support 
such as call centers. Chapter 6 examines financial services in detail, 
and the effects on that large sector deserve careful attention. Chapter 
7 looks at ``other sectors with large trans-border flows'', including 
business and leisure travel and e-commerce generally; it also looks at 
possible interruptions of pharmaceuticals research, which would be 
especially important to consider during the COVID pandemic, when 
sharing of personal data might be so important concerning the safety 
and efficacy of vaccines as well as other medical information.
    Looking ahead, I plan to work with the Cross-Border Data Forum as 
soon as possible to update and extend the data localization analysis. I 
hope to publish initial pieces of that analysis in time to offer 
comments on the EDPB Guidelines, due December 21. Many types of data 
flows are the same as in 1998, but there are important new categories 
of data flows, perhaps most notably for cloud computing, where the 
personal data of individuals is often stored in a different country. 
Several current reports are also available that provide useful 
discussion of the impacts of cutting off data, including here and here. 
I welcome any information or suggestions about how to accurately 
describe the effects of data localization, such as under a strict 
interpretation of EU law.
    Pending such additional study, I offer the following observations 
about the effects of a strict requirement of data localization:

  1.  Companies may find it difficult or impossible to ``fix'' the 
        problem themselves--the legal problem concerns the rules for 
        government access to personal data.

  2.  Data localization would have enormous impacts on third countries 
        other than the U.S. Schrems II clarified that its rule apply to 
        the U.S. in particular but also to all third countries that 
        lack essentially equivalent protections.

      a.  Some countries, such as China, have woefully weaker 
            safeguards against government surveillance than the U.S. 
            does. It is therefore difficult for me to understand what 
            additional safeguards might be taken to enable transfers to 
            such countries. China is Germany's largest trading partner, 
            illustrating the large effect on the EU (rather than the 
            U.S.) of strict limits on transfers.

      b.  Other countries, such as Canada, are democracies with strong 
            privacy regimes, but have not thus far received an adequacy 
            determination. Even if the EU and U.S. reach an agreement, 
            there will be legal uncertainty about whether and how 
            transfers can continue to these other democracies.

  3.  Particular study should focus on the effects on EU individuals, 
        who may lose access to services and face reduced choice about 
        how to live their online life. Similarly, EU-based businesses 
        may face serious obstacles, beginning but not limited to how 
        they operate with their non-EU affiliates, suppliers, and 
        partners. Detailed study of the effect on the EU will help EU 
        decisionmakers weigh how to protect privacy while also meeting 
        other goals, as stated by the CJEU in Schrems II, that are 
        ``necessary in a democratic society.''

  4.  During the coronavirus pandemic, individuals and businesses rely 
        more than ever before on online services, many of which are 
        operated or managed across borders. Disruptions from data 
        localization thus would appear to be especially great until we 
        reach a post-pandemic time.

  5.  In conclusion on the effects of a strict EU approach, it is vital 
        to consider carefully what measures can satisfy all the 
        relevant legal constraints. New solutions quite possibly are 
        necessary to enable continued data flows along with the 
        legally-required improvements in privacy protection.
D. Appendix 1 to this testimony provides detailed proposals for one of 
        the requirements of the EU Charter--individual redress for 
        violation of rights in the U.S. surveillance system.
    This testimony will briefly summarize key points from Appendix 1, 
which provides details on how the U.S. might craft a new system of 
individual redress to address the CJEU's concerns. The Appendix has 
three parts:

  1.  Discussion of the August 13 proposal by Kenneth Propp and myself, 
        entitled ``After Schrems II: A Proposal to Meet the Individual 
        Redress Problem.'' In order to provide an effective fact-
        finding phase, a statute could create a mandate for 
        intelligence agencies to conduct an effective investigation 
        when an individual (or a Data Protection Authority on behalf of 
        the individual) makes a complaint. This mandate is similar to 
        the Freedom of Information Act--an individual does not have to 
        show specific injury in order to make a FOIA request, and an 
        individual similarly would not need to show injury to request 
        the investigation. Once the fact-finding is concluded, the 
        statute could provide for appeal to the Foreign Intelligence 
        Surveillance Court (FISC).

  2.  Discussion of the article by European legal expert Christopher 
        Docksey on ``Schrems II and Individual Redress--Where There's a 
        Will, There's a Way.'' This article found the Propp/Swire 
        approach promising, while pointing out important aspects of EU 
        law to be considered in any U.S. system for individual redress.

  3.  New material about how the individual redress system could be 
        created, even without a new statute. In the fact-finding phase, 
        Executive Branch agencies could be required to perform an 
        investigation pursuant to a new Executive Order or other 
        presidential action. An independent agency, such as the Privacy 
        and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, could sign a memorandum of 
        understanding that would bind the agency to participate in the 
        process. One the fact-finding is complete, complaints that 
        concern surveillance under Section 702 FISA could then go to 
        the FISC. The FISC has continuing oversight of actions pursuant 
        to its annual court order concerning Section 702. It appears 
        that the government could promise to report the outcome of an 
        investigation to the FISC, and the FISC could then review the 
        fact-finding investigation to determine whether it complied 
        with its court order.

    As discussed in Appendix 1, ``non-statutory approaches are worth 
considering even if a somewhat better system might be created by a 
statute. A non-statutory approach quite possibly is the best way to 
ensure that data flows and privacy protections exist during an interim 
period while legislation is being considered.''
    Based on my experience, the fundamental rights orientation of EU 
data protection law has often emphasized the importance of a mechanism 
for an individual to make a complaint or access request. Then, there 
must be a mechanism with sufficient independence and authority to 
review the facts and issue an order to correct any violations. As the 
CJEU re-emphasized in Schrems II, Article 47 of the Charter requires 
``an effective remedy before a tribunal.'' After working extensively on 
this subject, and speaking with both European and American experts, I 
believe it is vital and apparently feasible to construct a new system 
of individual redress with respect to actions by U.S. surveillance 
agencies. Creating such a system would directly respond to a repeated 
and important criticism to date of the ``essential equivalence'' of 
U.S. protections.
E. Along with concerns about lack of individual redress, the CJEU found 
        that the EU Commission had not established that U.S. 
        surveillance was ``proportionate'' in its scope and operation. 
        Appendix 2 to this testimony seeks to contribute to an informed 
        judgment on proportionality, by cataloguing developments in 
        U.S. surveillance safeguards since the Commission's issuance of 
        its Privacy Shield decision in 2016.
    Along with lack of individual redress, the Schrems II court found 
that the principle of proportionality requires that a legal basis which 
permits interference with fundamental rights must ``itself define the 
scope of the limitation on the exercise of the right concerned and lay 
down clear and precise rules governing the scope and application of the 
measure in question and imposing minimum safeguards.'' ( 180). The 
court held that the 2016 Privacy Shield adequacy decision by the EU 
Commission did not show proportionality for Section 702 and EO 12,333. 
( 184).
    Concerning the issue of proportionality, I offer six observations:

  1.  Appendix 2 to this testimony provides ``Updates to U.S. Foreign 
        Intelligence Law since 2016 Testimony.'' Appendix 2 presents 
        updates on the U.S. legal and regulatory regime for foreign 
        intelligence surveillance that have occurred since testimony of 
        over 300 pages that I provided to the Irish High Court in 2016 
        on the same subject (the ``2016 Testimony''). Taken together, 
        the 2016 Testimony and Appendix 2 seek to present an integrated 
        set of references that may inform ongoing assessments, under 
        European Union law, of the proportionality and overall adequacy 
        of protection of personal data related to U.S. foreign 
        intelligence law.

  2.  A proportionality assessment is quite different than the issue of 
        individual redress. Redress is a specific assessment--a 
        sufficient redress provision exists or it doesn't. by contrast, 
        ``proportionality'' can be a more wide-ranging and fact-based 
        assessment, similar to defining a term such as ``reasonable.''

  3.  As a related point, the Schrems II decision cites European law 
        that privacy and data protection rights ``are not absolute 
        rights,'' but instead ``must be considered in relation to their 
        function in society. ( 172) In addition, standard data 
        protection clauses are lawful ``where do not go beyond what is 
        necessary in a democratic society to safeguard, inter alia, 
        national security, defence and public security.'' ( 144). More 
        documentation may thus be relevant as evidence of what is 
        ``necessary in a democratic society.''

  4.  Appendix 1, concerning individual redress, discusses the 
        possibility of incorporating concepts such as proportionality 
        and necessity, or related terms used in U.S. law, into the 
        targeting procedures for Section 702 approved annually by the 
        FISC. I make this proposal for the first time in this 
        testimony, and so there may be classified or other persuasive 
        reasons why such an approach is inadvisable or unlawful.

  5.  In considering whether and how to issue an updated adequacy 
        opinion about the United States, the EU Commission will thus 
        have available a considerable record that evidences the large 
        number and high quality of safeguards within the U.S. 
        surveillance system. Chapter 6 of my 2016 Testimony cited a 
        study led by Ian Brown, then of Oxford University, that 
        concluded that the U.S. legal system of foreign intelligence 
        law contains ``much clearer rules on the authorization and 
        limits on the collection, use, sharing, and oversight of data 
        relating to foreign nationals than the equivalent laws of 
        almost all EU Member States.'' The U.S. government's White 
        Paper this fall adds particulars about current safeguards.

  6.  With that said, European law to date has indicated that 
        ``essential equivalence'' of a third country is judged against 
        the standards set forth by the CJEU, rather than a comparison 
        of U.S. practices to the practices of the EU member states. 
        Professor Kristina Irion this year has explained the relevant 
        EU doctrine. Supporters of U.S. or other third country adequacy 
        might therefore complain about hypocrisy or an unfair standard, 
        but such arguments to date have not prevailed in European 
        courts.

    In conclusion on proportionality, it is important for the United 
States and the EU Commission to develop a strong record for why Section 
702 and other surveillance programs currently are ``proportionate,'' or 
else consider reforms that do establish proportionality.
F. Negotiating an EU/U.S. adequacy agreement is important in the short 
        term.
    There are strong reasons for the EU and the U.S. to seek agreement 
in the short term, so that the EU Commission can issue an adequacy 
decision. I highlight five points:

  1.  Especially in the wake of the very strict EDPB draft guidance, 
        there is now considerable uncertainty about the lawful basis 
        for many transfers from the EU to third countries, including 
        the U.S. As mentioned above, there may well be court orders 
        issued, even before January 20, that prohibit transfers of 
        personal data by one or more major companies based in the U.S.

  2.  My understanding is that the current administration has a process 
        in place to engage immediately with the EU. Even though a Biden 
        administration would have available experts on these EU/U.S. 
        data issues, there could be a disruptive delay after January 20 
        if discussions are not completed by then. The immediate 
        discussions should take account of the legal and political 
        realities facing the EU Commission--it will only wish to enter 
        into an agreement with a strong case that it is acting 
        consistent with the CJEU decision in Schrems II. The U.S. thus 
        has a stronger-than-usual incentive to make its ``best and 
        final offer'' quickly, because of the limited time to 
        renegotiate before January 20.

  3.  To avoid potentially large disruptions, it makes sense to achieve 
        a short-term package even if additional reforms and agreements 
        may be possible in the longer-run. For instance, an adequacy 
        decision might be for a limited time, such as one year. That 
        would provide a new administration and the EU time to develop 
        longer-term agreements across both data protection and other 
        issue areas, as the EU has indicated it would like to do. A 
        deadline, such as one year, would provide a useful incentive 
        for all concerned to continue to work intensively toward a 
        longer-term solution.

  4.  Any short-term approach should include, if possible, clear 
        attention to key sectors, including medical research and 
        financial services. During the pandemic, it would be foolhardy 
        to interrupt the ability of medical researchers and 
        manufacturers to develop and test for the safety and efficacy 
        of COVID-19 treatments and vaccines. In addition, the financial 
        services sector has historically relied primarily on Standard 
        Contractual Clauses for transfers, rather than Privacy Shield. 
        My understanding is that to date there has been low risk within 
        the EU of enforcement against the financial services sector, 
        which I believe transfers large amounts of personal data daily 
        for business and regulatory reasons. With strict approaches 
        such as the EDPB draft guidance, there is now increased risk of 
        disruption of the global financial system due to possible 
        limits on transfers of personal data from the EU to third 
        countries.

  5.  There is an important reason, from the EU perspective, to issue 
        an adequacy decision for the U.S. in the short term, even 
        though Schrems II applies to third countries generally. The 
        specific judicial findings in Europe have been about essential 
        equivalence and the U.S., even though the U.S. has stronger 
        safeguards than most or all other countries for foreign 
        intelligence surveillance and privacy. An adequacy decision 
        initially concerning the U.S. thus provides the EU time to 
        clarify its overall approach for transfers to third countries. 
        Enforcement actions can meanwhile proceed with respect to other 
        third countries, such as China, to enable the EU judicial 
        process to make findings relevant to multiple third countries, 
        and avoid a discriminatory impact on an allied nation--the 
        U.S.--that has many safeguards already in place.
G. A short-run agreement would assist in creating a better overall 
        long-run agreement or agreements.
    As discussed through this testimony, there are urgent short-term 
difficulties concerning the lawful basis for transfers of personal data 
from the EU to third countries. I next explain four reasons why an 
adequacy agreement in the near future would assist in creating a better 
overall set of reforms and agreements in the longer-run:

  1.  In this testimony, I am suggesting the desirability of seeking an 
        adequacy agreement in the short run, such as for one year. This 
        sort of breathing period would enable a new administration to 
        engage systematically to create durable approaches for 
        agreements with the EU on data protection and other issues.

  2.  A short-term agreement would provide the Congress with time to 
        consider any legislation that may assist in creating a durable 
        approach to enabling trans-Atlantic transfers while also 
        protecting privacy, meeting EU and U.S. legal requirements, and 
        achieving other goals including national security. As one 
        example, non-statutory approaches for individual redress may be 
        possible, as explained in Appendix 1, but a subsequent statute 
        might improve on the non-statutory approach.

  3.  One category of legislation to consider is for the U.S. to codify 
        in statute safeguards that already exist in practice. One 
        example would be the protections for the personal data of non-
        U.S. persons, as provided currently in PPD-28. More broadly, 
        Appendix 2 to this testimony provides examples of privacy-
        protective practices that currently exist but are not 
        explicitly set forth by statute. This sort of codification 
        could address EU concerns that informal guidance or even agency 
        policies are not ``established in law'' as effectively as a 
        statute or other binding legal instrument.

  4.  On an even longer time scale, there are strong reasons for the 
        U.S., the EU, and democratic allies to engage systematically on 
        a realistic and protective set of guidelines for government 
        access to personal data held by the private sector. Such a 
        process should include input from a range of expert 
        stakeholders, including data protection/privacy experts but 
        also experts in areas such as national security, law 
        enforcement, and economic policy. I understand the OECD may 
        move forward with such an initiative, first proposed by Japan, 
        on ``free flow of data with trust'' with respect to government 
        access to data held by the private sector. Such guidelines, 
        among other goals, could help define what safeguards are 
        ``necessary in a democratic society,'' both to protect 
        fundamental rights and achieve other compelling goals.
H. As the U.S. considers its own possible legal reforms in the 
        aftermath of Schrems II, it is prudent and a normal part of 
        negotiations to seek to understand where the other party--the 
        EU--may have flexibility to reform its own laws.
    For understandable reasons, the bulk of discussion to date has 
focused on what reforms the U.S. might consider in order to meet legal 
requirements set forth in Schrems II and other CJEU decisions. With 
that said, my testimony today discusses reasons to seek both short-term 
and longer-term agreements with the EU on cross-border data issues. It 
is normal and prudent, in any negotiation, to understand where each 
party may have flexibility to negotiate. As one example, my view is 
that the U.S. should seriously consider reforms to enable individual 
redress for EU citizens related to U.S. surveillance activities. Where 
might the EU also consider reforming any aspect of its regime?
    Recognizing that views might vary about what is possible as a legal 
or policy matter, I offer four observations:

  1.  For reasons discussed above, I believe there is room, consistent 
        with the Schrems II decision, for the EDPB to make changes to 
        its draft guidance--the CJEU contemplated some continuation of 
        transfers where additional safeguards are in place, but the 
        draft guidance is so strict that such transfers in practice 
        appear to be eliminated. The analysis by Professor Theodore 
        Christakis examines specific ways the EDPB guidance might be 
        amended consistent with EU law.

  2.  Chapter V of the GDPR governs ``transfers of personal data to 
        third countries or international organizations.'' Article 46 of 
        GDPR sets forth extensive measures to enable lawful transfers 
        to third countries that have not received an adequacy 
        determination under Article 45. A similar approach existed 
        under Article 26 of the Data Protection Directive, which 
        applied from 1998 until GDPR went into effect in 2018. If the 
        EU came to the view that Article 46 had been interpreted more 
        narrowly than intended, then the EU could at least contemplate 
        a targeted amendment to GDPR to clarify its intent to allow 
        transfers under Article 46 with defined, appropriate 
        safeguards. Any such amendment might be politically painful and 
        challenging within the EU; massive disruptions of global trade 
        would also be painful and challenging.

  3.  The legal basis for transfers to the U.S. might be stronger if 
        the U.S. and the EU negotiated a formal international 
        agreement, such as a treaty. I have seen draft scholarship, not 
        yet public, that indicates that the legal basis for transfers 
        from the EU to a third country such as the U.S. might be 
        stronger if done pursuant to a formal international agreement, 
        such as a treaty. The Safe Harbor and Privacy Shield were not 
        treaties. Such a treaty would presumably not be negotiated or 
        implemented in the short term, but may be a useful longer-term 
        approach.

  4.  By contrast, in discussions with EU experts, they have clearly 
        stated that an amendment to the Charter of Fundamental Rights 
        would be extremely difficult or impossible to consider. 
        Americans can readily understand this view--imagine if another 
        country insisted that the U.S. amend the First Amendment free 
        speech guarantees. It will thus be important, as a matter of EU 
        law, to understand what is required under the Charter. The 
        Commission, Parliament, and other EU institutions are legally 
        bound to follow the Charter, but have room outside those 
        requirements to make decisions within their competence.

    To date, there has been little or no visible discussion within the 
EU about reforming its own data protection laws, such as considering 
any change to GDPR. In discussing possible changes, I am not seeking to 
tell the EU how to write its own laws. The limited point here is that 
the U.S. and other third countries, in contemplating difficult reforms 
to their own laws, can reasonably at least consider how the EU might 
make reforms as well. Any eventual agreements can then be built on an 
understanding of what is or is not legally possible within each legal 
system.
PART II: Observations on U.S. Political and Policy Landscape
    A. Issues related to Schrems II have largely been bipartisan in the 
U.S., with substantial continuity across the Obama and Trump 
administrations, and expected as well for a Biden administration. 
Issues related to the Privacy Shield, Schrems II, and trans-Atlantic 
data flows have been far more bipartisan in the U.S. than for many 
other policy issues. I briefly highlight six aspects of continuity

  1.  Privacy Shield. The EU-U.S. Privacy Shield was signed in 2016, 
        under President Obama. The Trump administration has uniformly 
        supported the Privacy Shield, including working closely with EU 
        officials in its annual reviews.

  2.  Enforcement by the Federal Trade Commission. The FTC is an 
        independent agency, charged with enforcing violations of the 
        Privacy Shield, as part of its general authority to protect 
        privacy and enforce against unfair and deceptive acts. Change 
        in administration, in my view, has not affected and will not 
        affect the FTC's commitment to enforce company commitments to 
        protect privacy in cross-border data flows.

  3.  PPD-28. President Obama issued PPD-28, with its safeguards for 
        non-U.S. persons in signals intelligence, in 2014. PPD-28 has 
        remained in force under President Trump.

  4.  Surveillance transparency and safeguards generally. Appendix 2 to 
        this testimony reports on safeguards and other developments in 
        surveillance since the Privacy Shield was negotiated in 2016 
        and I provided my expert testimony in Ireland. The consistent 
        theme in Appendix 2 is how transparency and surveillance 
        safeguards have continued extremely similarly under the Obama 
        and Trump administrations.

  5.  Continued attention both to privacy and other goals such as 
        national security. As a member in 2013 of the Review Group on 
        Intelligence and Communications Technology, I observed how 
        seriously U.S. government officials treated both privacy and 
        other important goals such as national security. My opinion is 
        that similar attention to these goals has continued and will 
        continue for each U.S. administration.

  6.  A Biden administration can draw upon experts in these EU/U.S. 
        data issues. Another reason to expect policy continuity is that 
        the Biden administration will have available experts in Privacy 
        Shield and other EU/U.S. data issues. For example, key 
        negotiators of the Privacy Shield, as signed in 2016, were Ted 
        Dean, then in the U.S. Department of Commerce, and Robert Litt, 
        then General Counsel for the Office of the Director of National 
        Intelligence. Both Mr. Dean and Mr. Litt have been named as 
        members of the Biden-Harris transition team.

    In short, even though there are many differences on other policy 
matters, what is remarkable for EU/U.S. data issues is bipartisan 
agreement on issues of trans-Atlantic data flows.
B. Passing comprehensive privacy legislation would help considerably in 
        EU/U.S. negotiations.
    I believe that enactment of comprehensive commercial privacy 
legislation would greatly improve the overall atmosphere in Europe for 
negotiations between the EU and the U.S. about the effects of Schrems 
II.
    This conclusion may seem counter-intuitive. After all, the CJEU 
holdings concerned only issues of U.S. intelligence access to personal 
data. By contrast, a commercial privacy statute would apply exclusively 
or primarily to private-sector processing of personal data. As a strict 
legal matter, a comprehensive commercial privacy law in the U.S. would 
not address the holdings in Schrems II.
    Nonetheless, I am confident that a meaningful, protective 
commercial privacy bill would make an important difference. That is not 
only my own intuition, developed after a quarter-century of working on 
EU/U.S. data issues. In addition, I have asked the question to multiple 
European experts. Their response has been unanimous and positive, along 
the lines of ``Yes, that would make a big difference.''
    Here are a few reasons to think enacting a comprehensive commercial 
privacy law would help:

  1.  We have seen the link previously between U.S. intelligence 
        surveillance and the EU reaction on commercial privacy. The 
        clearest example is what happened after the Snowden revelations 
        began in June, 2013. Before that, it looked like the draft of 
        GDPR was blocked or moving slowly through the EU Parliament. 
        After that, GDPR was amended in multiple ways to be 
        considerably stricter, including on the U.S.-led tech sector. 
        GDPR passed the Parliament overwhelmingly in early 2014 by a 
        621-10 margin. EU Vice President Viviane Reding, in her 
        official statement on the vote, specifically referenced ``the 
        U.S. data spying scandals'' as a reason for passage.

  2.  The U.S. may soon become the only major nation globally that 
        lacks a comprehensive commercial privacy law. Whatever a 
        person's views may be of the best approach to protecting 
        privacy, the global trend is unmistakably in one direction--
        toward each country having a comprehensive commercial privacy 
        law. Professor Graham Greenleaf in Australia has carefully 
        documented these trends: ``The decade 2010-2019 has seen 62 new 
        countries enacting data privacy laws, more than in any previous 
        decade, giving a total of 142 countries with such laws by the 
        end of 2019.'' Perhaps more importantly, the four most 
        significant recent exceptions to such a law have been the U.S., 
        Brazil, India, and China. Brazil's new privacy law went into 
        effect in 2020. India has nearly finished its parliamentary 
        process to pass its law. China is also moving forward with a 
        commercial privacy law (although its protections against 
        government surveillance remain far weaker than in the U.S.). 
        Simply put, unless the U.S. acts in the next Congress, the U.S. 
        may be the only major nation globally that lacks a 
        comprehensive privacy law.

  3.  A U.S. privacy law would strengthen the hand of U.S. allies in 
        the EU. Currently, there are many in Brussels and throughout 
        the EU who favor retaining a strong alliance generally with the 
        U.S. That support for remaining allies was reflected, for 
        instance, in the broad EU Commission draft, reported by the 
        Financial Times, that ``seeks a fresh alliance with U.S. in 
        face of China challenge.'' More specifically, as seen for 
        instance in a recent DigitalEurope study on the effects of 
        Schrems II, many in Europe understand the harsh consequences to 
        Europeans themselves of a major cut-off in data flows.

     From the European perspective, the 2000 Safe Harbor agreement and 
        the 2016 Privacy Shield are examples of ``special deals'' that 
        make transfers to the U.S. easier than transfers to the other 
        countries in the world that lack a general adequacy finding. As 
        the U.S. becomes an increasingly glaring exception on privacy 
        laws, it becomes more and more difficult for those in Europe to 
        explain why the U.S. should be a favored partner. Put bluntly, 
        the U.S. as the last holdout on a privacy law can look more 
        like a ``privacy pariah'' than a ``favored partner.'' By 
        contrast, enacting a U.S. commercial privacy law sends the 
        message that the U.S. in general offers legal protections for 
        privacy. With a U.S. privacy law in place, it becomes far 
        easier in Brussels and the EU generally to complete a privacy 
        deal with the U.S. As a related point, serious progress on U.S. 
        privacy legislation during the next two years, such as passage 
        in a crucial committee such as Senate Commerce, can itself help 
        foster progress in EU/U.S. negotiations by showing that passage 
        of a U.S. privacy law is feasible.
C. This Congress may have a unique opportunity to enact comprehensive 
        commercial privacy legislation for the United States.
    You as Senators have far greater insight than an outside observer 
can have about what is possible to enact in this Committee, the Senate, 
or the Congress in the next two years. With that said, my own 
perspective is that the 117th Congress, convening this January, has the 
best chance to enact comprehensive Federal privacy legislation that I 
have ever seen.
    I offer six reasons for believing that now is an unusual 
opportunity to pass privacy legislation:

  1.  This Committee has already made a great deal of progress on 
        finding areas of agreement between the political parties. In 
        2020, there was significant convergence on draft legislation 
        supported, separately, by Chairman Wicker and Ranking Member 
        Cantwell. On the large majority of issues, the language was the 
        same or similar. Historically, major legislation often passes 
        after substantial work in a previous Congress. That previous 
        work settles much of the final package. Then, there are intense 
        and often difficult negotiations on the final issues, which for 
        privacy appear to be Federal preemption and private rights of 
        action. Nonetheless, however difficult those two issues may be, 
        it is far easier to come to a final deal on two issues than to 
        try to draft an entire bill on a blank slate.

  2.  Industry and all those concerned about EU/U.S. relations have a 
        strong interest in passing comprehensive Federal privacy 
        legislation. As just discussed above, there are compelling 
        reasons why progress on U.S. privacy legislation would increase 
        the possibility of a good outcome in the EU/U.S. negotiations. 
        For the politically savvy companies that operate in both Europe 
        and the United States, the benefit of supporting an overall 
        U.S. law quite possibly outweighs any company-specific reasons 
        to try to block the bill due to particular provisions in a 
        privacy bill.

  3.  Passage last month of the California privacy initiative provides 
        business with a new, compelling reason to support Federal 
        privacy legislation. In November, the voters in California 
        approved a ballot initiative, called the California Privacy 
        Rights Act (CPRA), which goes into effect on January 1, 2023. 
        The effective date, in my understanding, is no coincidence--it 
        gives the 117th Congress time to complete action on a Federal 
        law. CPRA, while having only mixed support from privacy and 
        civil liberties advocates, would add new privacy restrictions, 
        including in the area of online advertising. For this reason, 
        online advertising companies and companies that buy online 
        advertising have a new reason to support Federal legislation. 
        Taken together with business support due to the EU situation, 
        the U.S. business community in general is more prepared to 
        accept broad national privacy rules than ever before.

  4.  The California privacy initiative creates the possibility of 
        greater agreement on Federal preemption. To date, some members 
        of this Committee have pushed for broad Federal preemption of 
        state privacy laws, for reasons including preventing business 
        from having to comply with multiple and possibly contradictory 
        state laws. Other members of this Committee have pushed to have 
        the Federal legislation be a floor but not a ceiling, allowing 
        states to act first (as they have often done in the past) to 
        enact greater protection of individual privacy. I have written 
        three articles on preemption, about the history of Federal 
        privacy preemption, identifying key issues for preemption, and 
        a proposal (co-authored with Polyanna Sanderson of the Future 
        of Privacy Forum) for a process to narrow disagreement, based 
        on case-by-case examination of the numerous existing state 
        laws.

     Building on this previous analysis, the recent passage of the CPRA 
        creates a two-part proposal for how the differing sides on 
        preemption can each achieve a substantial victory. First, as a 
        win for those supporting privacy innovation in the states, the 
        California Consumer Privacy Act, which went into effect 
        already, would remain in effect. After all, businesses have 
        already had to comply with that law, so the major costs 
        associated with the law have already been spent. Second, the 
        new Federal law could preempt the CPRA, which does not go into 
        effect until 2023. Industry would thus be spared the challenge 
        of re-engineering their data systems again, so soon after 
        complying with CCPA. In addition, important privacy advocates, 
        including the ACLU of California and the Consumer Federation of 
        California, actually came out in opposition to CPRA. There may 
        thus be an opportunity to reach agreement on a significant 
        example of preemption. If both sides of this fierce debate win 
        a significant victory, then there may be more room to address 
        remaining preemption issues as something of a technical 
        drafting matter.

  5.  A Biden administration will support Federal privacy legislation. 
        The 2020 Democratic platform calls for enacting Federal privacy 
        legislation, and the Obama administration supported privacy 
        legislation as part of the 2012 announcement of a ``Privacy 
        Bill of Rights.'' Joe Biden himself has long worked on these 
        issues. He spoke to the European Parliament in 2010, garnering 
        headlines such as this: ``Biden vows to work with EU parliament 
        on data privacy.'' In addition, a Biden administration can draw 
        on numerous individuals who have extensive government 
        experience on privacy, including those who worked on the 
        Privacy Bill of Rights and negotiated the Privacy Shield.

  6.  The narrow majorities in both the Senate and House likely help 
        define the scope of the possible for Federal privacy 
        legislation. As a resident of Georgia, I know only too well the 
        intensity of effort for the two Senate run-off elections on 
        January 5--my wife and I have basically given up answering our 
        home telephone for the duration. After those run-offs, one of 
        the parties will have a narrow working majority in the Senate, 
        and the margin in the House of Representatives is also 
        unusually narrow. With such narrow margins, bipartisan 
        cooperation will be at a premium--neither party can afford to 
        support a privacy bill alone that would lose any of its 
        members, so the clearest path to a majority is with bipartisan 
        support. Last year's proposals from the Senate Commerce 
        Committee are the most logical starting point for negotiations. 
        New proposals from the wing of either party will likely have 
        difficulty making it into the legislation, unless the proposals 
        can garner support from a range of political viewpoints.

    In conclusion on the prospects for Federal privacy legislation, the 
stars may finally have aligned to enact meaningful privacy protections. 
A new Federal privacy law would enshrine in law a considerable list of 
new privacy protections for individuals. The law would also have 
support from businesses who usually oppose new government regulation. 
At a time when there is risk of partisan gridlock in Congress, Federal 
privacy legislation could be a significant instance of bipartisan 
accomplishment.
Background of the witness:
    Peter Swire is the Elizabeth and Tommy Holder Chair and Professor 
of Law and Ethics in the Scheller College of Business at the Georgia 
Institute of Technology. He is senior counsel with the law firm of 
Alston & Bird, and Research Director of the Cross-Border Data Forum.
    In 1998, the Brookings Institution published Swire & Litan, ``None 
of Your Business: World Data Flows, Electronic Commerce, and the 
European Privacy Directive. In 1999, Swire was named Chief Counselor 
for Privacy in the U.S. Office of Management and Budget, the first 
person to have U.S. government-wide responsibility for privacy policy. 
Swire was the lead White House official during negotiation of the EU/
U.S. Safe Harbor.
    After the Snowden revelations, Swire served as one of five members 
of President Obama's Review Group on Intelligence and Communications 
Technology, making recommendations on privacy and other reforms for the 
U.S. intelligence community. In 2015, the International Association of 
Privacy Professionals awarded Swire its annual Privacy Leadership 
Award. In 2016 he was an expert witness in the Irish trial for Schrems 
v. Facebook, and submitted testimony of over 300 pages describing the 
legal safeguards for the U.S. intelligence community's use of personal 
data.
    In 2018, Swire was named an Andrew Carnegie Fellow for his project 
on ``Protecting Human Rights and National Security in the New Age of 
Data Nationalism.'' In 2019, the Future of Privacy Forum honored him 
for Outstanding Academic Scholarship.
                                 ______
                                 
    ``Statutory and Non-Statutory Ways to Create Individual Redress 
                   for U.S. Surveillance Activities''

         Appendix 1 to U.S. Senate Commerce Committee Testimony

          on ``The Invalidation of the EU-U.S. Privacy Shield

              and the Future of Transatlantic Data Flows''

                             Peter Swire\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ Elizabeth and Tommy Holder Chair of Law and Ethics, Georgia 
Tech Scheller College of Business; Research Director, Cross-Border Data 
Forum; senior counsel, Alston & Bird LLP. The opinions expressed here 
are my own, and should not be attributed to the Cross-Border Data Forum 
or any client. For comments on earlier versions of the research, I 
thank Theodore Christakis, Dan Felz, Robert Litt, and Kenneth Propp. 
Errors are my own.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    This document addresses a legal issue that calls for solution to 
enable continued lawful basis for flows of personal data from the 
European Union to the United States--individual redress. In Schrems II, 
the Court of Justice for the European Union held that the lack of 
individual redress in the United States for persons in the EU 
purportedly surveilled by U.S. intelligence was a basis for finding 
that the Privacy Shield, as approved by the EU Commission, did not 
provide ``adequate'' protection of personal data. In this setting, 
individual redress refers to the ability of an individual, including an 
individual in the European Union, to receive a determination that their 
rights have not been violated by U.S. national security surveillance.
    For a U.S. audience, it is important to understand that the 
requirement of individual redress is a constitutional requirement, 
under Article 47 of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights. The European 
Data Protection Board (EDPB) in November published the ``European 
Essential Guarantees'' based on the jurisprudence of the European Court 
of Justice and the European Court of Human Rights. One of the four 
essential guarantees, as described by the EDPB, is that ``effective 
remedies need to be available to the individual.'' This appendix to my 
December 9 testimony before
    U.S. Senate Commerce Committee seeks to identify issues and suggest 
possible approaches to meet the individual redress requirement. The 
testimony for which this is an appendix contains a summary discussion 
of the issue of individual redress. This appendix provides more 
detailed analysis and legal citations, in hopes of advancing discussion 
of the individual redress issue.
    This appendix to my testimony to the Committee has three sections:

  1.  Discussion of the proposal that I published on August 13 with 
        Kenneth Propp, entitled ``After Schrems II: A Proposal to Meet 
        the Individual Redress Problem.'' This article proposed ways 
        that a new U.S. statute could apparently meet the EU legal 
        standard for individual redress.

  2.  On October 14, European legal expert Christopher Docksey 
        published ``Schrems II and Individual Redress--Where There's a 
        Will, There's a Way.'' This article found the Propp/Swire 
        approach promising, while pointing out important aspects of EU 
        law to be considered in any U.S. system for individual redress.

  3.  Discussion of non-statutory approaches for individual redress. 
        Since August, working with others at the Cross-Border Data 
        Forum, I have examined lawful ways to meet the goals of the 
        initial proposal, in the event that Congress does not pass a 
        new statute to do so.\2\ This appendix includes a number of 
        ideas that have not previously been published.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \2\ Following the publication of the August proposal, I was asked 
by U.S. officials about the possibility of a non-statutory approach for 
individual redress. I then developed the non-statutory ideas that are 
published here for the first time, and described them to officials in 
response to their request.

    The discussion here necessarily addresses details of multiple areas 
of law, including constitutional, statutory, and administrative 
provisions of both U.S. and EU law, and including the complex legal 
provisions governing U.S. national security surveillance under the 
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA) and other laws. As 
Christopher Docksey emphasizes, the U.S. need not have perfect 
``equivalence'' with EU law--in our different constitutional orders, 
there may not be any lawful way to provide precisely the same 
procedures as apply under the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) 
and EU fundamental rights law. Instead, the standard announced by the 
CJEU is ``essential equivalence,'' a legal term that has been the 
subject of extensive interpretation by the CJEU. As EU courts have 
stated, the ``essence of the right'' must be protected. The effort here 
is to further the discussion of how such protections might be created 
under U.S. law.
I. Individual Redress Proposal Based on U.S. Statutory Change
    On August 13, Kenneth Propp and I published in Lawfare ``After 
Schrems II: A Proposal to Meet the Individual Redress Problem.'' \3\ In 
that case, the CJEU observed that the U.S. surveillance programs 
conducted under Section 702 of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance 
Act (FISA) or EO 12333 do not grant surveilled persons ``actionable'' 
rights of redress before ``an independent and impartial court.'' The 
Court emphasized that ``the very existence of effective judicial review 
designed to ensure compliance with provisions of EU law is inherent in 
the existence of the rule of law.'' It added that ``legislation not 
providing for any possibility for an individual to pursue legal 
remedies in order to have access to personal data relating to him or 
her'' fails to ``respect the essence of the fundamental right to 
effective judicial protection,'' as set forth in Article 47 of the EU 
Charter of Fundamental Rights.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \3\ Kenneth Propp & Peter Swire, ``After Schrems II: A Proposal to 
Meet the Individual Redress Problem.'' \3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The CJEU identified two ways in which U.S. surveillance law lacks 
essential equivalence to EU safeguards. The first, and the focus of 
this article, is that the U.S. lacks an ``effective and enforceable'' 
right of individual redress. The second, which is beyond the scope of 
the proposal we offer here, is the finding that there is a lack of 
``proportionality'' in the scale of U.S. intelligence activities. As 
discussed in the initial proposal, the CJEU thus measures U.S. 
surveillance law protections against an idealized, formal standard set 
forth primarily in EU constitutional law.
A. Lessons from Schrems II About Redress
    The Privacy Shield was itself an iterative response to the 
criticisms of U.S. surveillance law voiced by the CJEU in striking down 
its predecessor, the Safe Harbor Framework, in 2015. In that prior 
ruling, the Court emphasized the importance of effective redress to 
protect surveilled persons, with an independent decision-maker 
providing protection for the individual's rights.
    In response, the United States agreed in the Privacy Shield to 
designate an Ombudsperson, an Under Secretary of State, to receive 
requests from Europeans regarding possible U.S. national security 
access to their personal data, and to facilitate action by the U.S. 
intelligence community to remedy any violation of U.S. law. This role 
was built on top of the Under Secretary's previously assigned 
responsibilities under Presidential Policy Directive 28 as a point of 
contact for foreign governments concerned about U.S. intelligence 
activities. No change in U.S. surveillance law was needed to establish 
the Ombudsperson--only the conclusion of an interagency memorandum of 
understanding between the Department of State and components of the 
U.S. intelligence community.
    In Schrems II, the CJEU disapproved of the Privacy Shield's 
Ombudsperson innovation. The Court observed that the Under Secretary of 
State was part of the executive branch, not independent from it, and in 
any case lacked the power to take corrective decisions that would bind 
the intelligence community. An inquiry conducted by an administrative 
official, with no possibility of appealing the result to a court, did 
not meet the EU constitutional standard for independence and 
impartiality, the CJEU held.
    The implications of the CJEU's decision support the conclusion that 
any future attempt by the United States to provide individual redress, 
to meet EU legal requirements, must have two dimensions: (1) a credible 
fact-finding inquiry into classified surveillance activities in order 
to ensure protection of the individual's rights, and (2) the 
possibility of appeal to an independent judicial body that can remedy 
any violation of rights should it occur.
B. Possible Factfinders
    In devising a system of individual redress for potential 
surveillance abuses, the first question is where best to house the 
fact-finding process. Our initial proposal mentioned two possible ways 
to conduct such fact-finding. The first is to task fact-finding to 
existing Privacy and Civil Liberties Officers (PCLOs) within the 
intelligence community, as established by Section 803 of the 
Implementing Recommendations of the 9/11 Commission Act of 2007. The 
second is to enlist the Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, 
and independent agency tasked with oversight of intelligence community 
activities. Since we wrote the proposal, as discussed below, the 
suggestion has also been made that fact-finding could be carried out by 
the Office of the Inspector General in the relevant intelligence 
agency.
    Beyond the question of whom in the U.S. Government is best-placed 
to act as a factfinder, a new system of individual redress would need 
to define the standard for that investigation. To meet the legal 
standard announced by the CJEU, the system would apply at least to 
individuals protected under EU law; the system might also enable 
actions for individual redress for U.S. persons. Precise definition 
will require the involvement of experts within the U.S. intelligence 
community as well as those knowledgeable about surveillance-related 
redress procedures in European countries. A legal standard for all 
complaints, at a minimum, would likely test compliance with U.S. legal 
requirements, such as whether collection under FISA Section 702 was 
done consistent with the statute and judges' orders governing topics 
such as targeting and minimization. In addition, a future agreement 
between the U.S. and the EU or other third countries could add 
provisions forming part of the investigative standard. For instance, as 
discussed below, there may be a way to state explicitly that the 
surveillance will be necessary and proportionate, which are important 
legal terms under the EU Charter of Human Rights and the European 
Convention on Human Rights. Our proposal noted that the U.S. might 
perhaps negotiate to ensure that the EU provide reciprocal rights for 
U.S. persons with respect to any surveillance conducted by EU Member 
States. Similarly, the new redress system might address other issues, 
including whether individuals would ever receive actual notice some 
period of time after they have been surveilled. Such notice has been an 
element of EU data protection law, although notice of intelligence 
activities appears to have been a rarity there in actual practice.
    The fact-finding process would logically have two possible 
outcomes--no violation, or some violation that should be remedied. 
Where there is no violation, there would be a simple report to the 
individual, or perhaps to a Data Protection Authority acting in the EU 
on behalf of an individual. Under the Privacy Shield, the report was 
that there had been no violation of U.S. surveillance law or that any 
violation has been corrected. This sort of limited reporting about 
classified investigations exists for the U.K. Investigatory Powers 
Tribunal, which is prohibited from disclosing to the complainant 
``anything which might compromise national security or the prevention 
and detection of serious crime.'' As Christopher Docksey has noted, 
this type of reporting can also be found in Article 17 of the Law 
Enforcement Directive (EU) 2016/680.
    Broader disclosure about classified investigations risks benefiting 
hostile states, terrorist groups or others. By contrast, where any 
violation is found, then no report could be given until the violation 
was remedied. For instance, if there was illegal surveillance about the 
person seeking redress, the personal data might be deleted or any other 
measure taken to remedy the violation.
C. Judicial Review in the FISC
    In the initial article, we stated that the obvious and appropriate 
path for an appeal from the fact-finding stage would be to the Foreign 
Intelligence Surveillance Court (FISC). FISC judges, along with other 
Federal judges, meet the gold standard for independence, since Article 
III of the U.S. Constitution ensures that they have lifetime tenure and 
are located outside of the executive branch. Making the FISC 
responsible for the adjudication of individual complaints would go in 
some respects go beyond the FISC's current institutional 
responsibilities, but the Federal judges on the FISC are experienced in 
reviewing agency decisions in non-FISC cases. The FISC is better-suited 
than an ordinary Article III court would be, because of its specialized 
expertise in U.S. surveillance law and well-established procedures for 
dealing with classified matters. As discussed in more detail below, the 
FISC already provides judicial oversight for the FISA Section 702 
program--and has a proven track record of effective oversight. In the 
wake of the Snowden revelations, numerous FISC decisions were 
declassified and made public. A detailed review of these decisions 
concluded: ``The FISC monitors compliance with its orders, and has 
enforced with significant sanctions in cases of noncompliance.''
    A key legal issue in crafting such a system is ensuring that a 
plaintiff has ``standing'' to sue, as required by Article III of the 
U.S. Constitution. In the Irish High Court decision in Schrems II, 
Judge Costello wrote that ``All of the evidence show that [standing] is 
an extraordinarily difficult hurdle for a plaintiff to overcome'' in 
government surveillance cases. In summary, the plaintiff must show: (1) 
he or she has suffered injury in fact (2) that is causally connected to 
the conduct complained of and (3) is likely to be redressed by a 
favorable judicial opinion. Under EU law, an individual such as Max 
Schrems can bring a successful case without proving that he was ever 
under surveillance by the U.S. government. By contrast, as explained by 
Tim Edgar in Lawfare, plaintiffs in the U.S. have had to clear a high 
hurdle to establish standing and gain a legal ruling about the 
lawfulness of surveillance.
    To assure standing for these appeals to the FISC, a mechanism 
similar to the one utilized under the U.S. Freedom of Information Act 
(FOIA) appears feasible. Under FOIA, any individual can request that an 
agency produce documents, without the need to first demonstrate 
particular ``injury.'' The agency is then under a statutory requirement 
to conduct an effective investigation, and to explain any decision not 
to supply the documents. After the agency completes its investigation, 
the individual can appeal to Federal court to ensure independent 
judicial review. The judge then examines the quality of the agency's 
investigation to ensure compliance with law, and he or she can order 
changes in the event of any mistakes by the agency.
    Analogously, when seeking individual redress on a matter relating 
to national security, the FISC could independently assess whether the 
administrative investigation met statutory requirements, and the judge 
could issue an order to correct any mistakes by the agency--including 
by correcting or deleting data or requiring additional fact-finding. 
This sort of judicial review of agency action is extremely common under 
the Administrative Procedure Act that applies broadly across Federal 
agencies. Typically, the judge must ensure that the agency action is 
not ``arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not 
in accordance with law.'' There is standing on the part of the 
individual--a ``case or controversy''--to assess whether the agency has 
properly discharged its statutory duties. As with FOIA, there is no 
need to determine whether the complaining individual has suffered 
injury in fact, since the statute creates a duty on the agency to act 
in a defined way.
    We identify three features worth considering with this approach. 
First, due to the classified nature of the fact-finding, there may not 
be any workable way for the complainant to decide whether to bring an 
appeal. Therefore, it may make sense to have an automatic appeal to the 
FISC. Second, the 2015 USA FREEDOM Act established a role for appointed 
amici curiae who have full access to classified information and can 
brief the FISC on ``legal arguments that advance the protection of 
individual privacy and civil liberties.'' These amici could play a role 
in advocating for the rights of the complainant, so that the FISC judge 
can receive briefing from both the agency and an amicus assigned to 
scrutinize the agency investigation. Third, Congress could consider 
whether the right to file a complaint be extended to U.S. persons in 
addition to those making complaints from the EU concerning surveillance 
under FISA Section 702 and EO 12333. Congress should consider how to 
structure a meaningful right to redress while avoiding a flood of 
complaints. The experience from Europe, and from prior agreements such 
as Privacy Shield and the Terrorist Finance Tracking Program, suggests 
that the actual number of complaints would likely be manageable.
II. Assessment by European Data Protection Expert Christopher Docksey
    On October 14, Christopher Docksey published in Lawfare an article 
that commented on the Propp/Swire proposal, ``Schrems II and Individual 
Redress--Where There's a Will, There's a Way.'' Docksey is a leading 
expert in EU data protection law, after a career as senior lawyer for 
the EU Commission and then Director and Head of Secretariat of the 
European Data Protection Supervisor.
    Docksey was kind enough to state that ``Propp and Swire's proposal 
provides a valuable framework for discussions by U.S. policymakers on a 
durable solution to individual redress in the United States.'' His 
objective was to respond to the proposal ``from a European perspective, 
to underline the acceptable elements of their proposal and clarify 
which questions remain.'' He said: ``The key to identifying potential 
points of future compromise by the EU is understanding the nature of 
three different types of institutions: ``data protection officers 
(DPOs), independent supervisory authorities (DPAs) and courts.''
A. Fact-Finding Phase
    For the fact-finding phase, we suggested either the Section 803 
Privacy and Civil Liberties Officers (PCLOs) or the PCLOB. Docksey 
explored having the fact-finding conducted either by the Office of 
Inspector General (OIG) or else the PCLOB.
    In assessing the PCLOs, Docksey compares them to DPO's, whom he 
describes as ``part of the organization of the data controller but have 
the right and duty to act independently in carrying out their roles.'' 
Because they are within the organization itself--the Federal agency--
Docksey concludes they do not meet the EU requirement of ``independent 
oversight.''
    Docksey examines the role of the OIG, and concludes: ``It could be 
useful to explore whether the powers of the inspectors general could be 
strengthened to hear complaints referred by PCLOs and adopt binding 
orders for corrective action.'' As a potentially important factor for 
the EU legal analysis, OIG's have a reporting relationship to 
Congress--outside of the agency itself. As a legal risk of deploying 
the OIG's, Docksey observes that an Inspector General ``can be easily 
removed, as recent experience shows.''
    Under Docksey's analysis, the PCLOB, as an independent agency, is 
most similar to the European institution of the data protection 
authority. As shown in a report by the EU Fundamental Rights Agency, 
national law in the EU varies in the manner of supervision. Some 
nations enable their usual DPA's to have oversight for national 
security investigations. Others, such as the Netherlands, have 
independent supervisory agencies specifically for intelligence 
activities. Docksey underscores the EU legal requirement of the right 
to independent supervision by a DPA, which ``is enshrined as a specific 
element of the right to protection of personal data in Article 8(3) of 
the EU Charter and in Article 16(2) of the EU Treaty itself.''
    Assuming that the PCLOB has legal authority to conduct the 
investigation, therefore, the most analogous U.S. institution to a DPA, 
for conducting the fact-finding, would be the PCLOB. Concerning legal 
authority, the statute creating the PCLOB specifically provides that it 
shall have the power to review and analyze actions the Executive Branch 
takes to protect the U.S. from terrorism. The PCLOB's actions, however, 
have not been limited only to terrorism-related activities. As shown on 
the agency's website, the PCLOB has taken additional actions, including 
under Executive Order 13636 on Improving Critical Infrastructure 
Cybersecurity, as well as a request from the President that the Board 
provide an assessment of implementation of Presidential Policy 
Directive 28 (PPD-28), concerning protection of privacy and civil 
liberties in U.S. signals intelligence activities. By statute, Congress 
could explicitly authorize a role for the PCLOB in the individual 
redress process. As discussed further below, even in the absence of a 
statute, there would appear to be a legal basis for the PCLOB to play a 
role in a new individual redress process.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \4\ The PCLOB has a staff that is small compared to employment by 
U.S. intelligence agencies, so a problem might arise if there are many 
requests for individual redress. In response, first, my understanding 
is that there was only one request to the Privacy Shield Ombudsman in 
the five years that the position existed, so staffing may not be a 
problem. In addition, the agency may be able to assist the PCLOB in the 
fact-finding, such as by ``detailing'' agency individuals to work on 
behalf of the PCLOB. This sort of ``detailing'' has often been used in 
the Federal government where expertise and staffing exist in one 
agency, but individuals are temporarily placed under the direction of 
the White House or a different agency.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    In conclusion on the fact-finding phase, there are multiple 
possible ways to create the independent fact-finding process required 
under EU law. In addition, as Docksey explains in detail, the EU legal 
standard is not ``absolute equivalence''; instead the U.S. must provide 
``essential equivalence'' to EU legal protections. Docksey in his 
article explains reasons, in his view, why some U.S. approach to 
individual redress could indeed meet this ``essential equivalence'' 
standard.
B. Judicial Review in the FISC
    Once the fact-finding phase is complete, Docksey emphasized the 
constitutional requirement, under EU law, for judicial review. Article 
47 of the EU Charter states the constitutional text--there must be a 
right to an ``effective remedy before a tribunal.''
    In the Schrems II case, as quoted by Docksey, ``the advocate 
general enumerated the criteria laid down by the CJEU to assess whether 
a body is a tribunal.'' The advocate general wrote that the decision 
hinges on ``whether the body is established by law, whether it is 
permanent, whether its jurisdiction is compulsory, whether its 
procedure is inter partes, whether it applies rules of law and whether 
it is independent[.]'' Docksey adds: ``Probably the most important of 
these criteria is the requirement of independence. This means acting 
autonomously, without being subject to decisions or pressure by any 
other body that could impair the independent judgment of its members.''
    The FISC is a close fit for these announced criteria for judicial 
review:

  1.  Independence. For the most important criterion, each FISC judge 
        meets the gold standard for independence. Decisions are made by 
        a judge nominated by the President and confirmed by the Senate. 
        Each judge has lifetime tenure, and cannot be removed except 
        under the historically rare process of impeachment in the 
        Congress.

  2.  Established by law and applies rules of law. The FISC is 
        established by law in the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act 
        (FISA) and other statutes. It applies rules of law, including 
        these statutes and its published rules of procedure.

  3.  Permanence. The FISC is permanent, in the sense that the 
        authorizing statutes continue in operation unless there is a 
        new statute passed by the Congress.

  4.  Compulsory jurisdiction. The FISC is a Federal court, established 
        under Article III of the U.S. constitution. A Federal judge 
        acting in the FISC has the same judicial powers as a Federal 
        judge operating generally in the Federal courts. For instance, 
        the judge issues a binding order, punishable by contempt of 
        court, in cases of non-compliance. As with Federal judges 
        generally, the binding order can apply to a Federal agency as 
        well as to individuals.

  5.  Procedure ``inter partes.'' The FISC originally acted ex parte, 
        without opposing counsel, and now has procedures to act ``inter 
        partes,'' with counsel in addition to the government. The 
        Review Group on Intelligence and Communications Technology 
        explained in 2013 the reason for this change:

     ``When the FISC was created, it was assumed that it would resolve 
        routine and individualized questions of fact, akin to those 
        involved when the government seeks a search warrant. It was not 
        anticipated that the FISC would address the kinds of questions 
        that benefit from, or require, an adversary presentation. When 
        the government applies for a warrant, it must establish 
        `probable cause,' but an adversary proceeding is not involved. 
        As both technology and the law have evolved over time, however, 
        the FISC is sometimes presented with novel and complex issues 
        of law. The resolution of such issues would benefit from an 
        adversary proceeding.''

     Consistent with this recommendation, Congress created a set of 
        amici curiae, experts in privacy and related matters, in the 
        USA FREEDOM Act of 2015. 50 U.S.C. Sec. 1803(1)(i). A judge in 
        the FISC ``may appoint an individual or organization to serve 
        as amicus curiae, including to provide technical expertise, in 
        any instance as such court deems appropriate.'' As part of any 
        negotiation with the EU, the U.S. government could consider 
        promising to request appointment of such an amicus curiae in 
        any case involving the rights of an EU person. With such an 
        appointment, the FISC would meet the EU criterion of procedure 
        inter partes.

    In conclusion on the Docksey article, the discussion here has 
indicated options, consistent with EU law, for fact-finding concerning 
a complaint by an EU person about a possible violation of rights. 
Appeal then could be to the FISC, which meets the EU legal criteria for 
a ``tribunal.'' Docksey himself, after completing his analysis of the 
proposal, concluded: ``It is time to grasp the nettle. A compromise is 
worth the effort. And if there is the will, there is a way.''
III. Non-Statutory Variations on the Proposals
    Since our proposal was published in August, it has become more 
urgent to consider ways to establish an individual redress procedure 
without necessarily awaiting a statute passed by the Congress, for at 
least three reasons:

  1.  Drafting a statute on these novel issues is a complex task, which 
        even with full agreement among members of Congress could take 
        substantial time to complete.

  2.  The possibility has grown that there may soon be large cut-offs 
        of personal data from the EU to third countries such as the 
        U.S. As Professor Theodore Christakis has recently explained, 
        the November guidance from the European Data Protection Board 
        appears to conclude that it is illegal, for a very wide array 
        of routine business practices, to transfer personal data from 
        the EU to third countries.

  3.  Non-statutory approaches are worth considering even if a somewhat 
        better system might be created by a statute. A non-statutory 
        approach quite possibly is the best way to ensure that data 
        flows and privacy protections exist during an interim period 
        while legislation is being considered. Drafting a non-statutory 
        approach can benefit from commentary from experts in the U.S. 
        and EU legal systems, and the U.S. and EU officials working on 
        the issue can identify and address nuanced issues about how to 
        meet legal and policy goals for an agreement. In short, a non-
        statutory approach may be sufficient long-term to provide 
        individual redress by non-statutory means, although European 
        law emphasizes the strength of protections memorialized in a 
        statute. Alternatively, a non-statutory approach might bridge 
        the period until Congress enacts a statute.

    As with Parts I and II above, the discussion here addresses the 
fact-finding phase and then the possibility of judicial review.
A. Fact-finding Phase
    The discussion here of the Docksey article mentioned possible roles 
in fact-finding for the Section 804 Privacy and Civil Liberties 
Officers in each agency, the agency Inspectors General, and the PCLOB. 
The analysis here suggests possible ways that each might play a role in 
fact-finding without statutory change.
    The Section 804 PCLO's are subject to an Executive Order or similar 
mandates from the President. As a general matter, an Executive Order, 
Presidential Policy Directive, or other executive action can take 
effect under the President's power under Article II of the U.S. 
constitution to ``take care'' that the laws are faithfully executed. 
For national security matters, the President also can act as Commander-
in-Chief. Expertise in the possible scope of executive power resides in 
the Office of Legal Counsel in the U.S. Department of Justice, working 
with White House Counsel and other officials. As one example, the 
PCLO's could be ordered by the President to cooperate in specified ways 
with others involved in fact-finding, such as the PCLOB.
    As Docksey notes, there is a strong tradition of reporting from the 
Inspectors General to Congress, and IG's have a history of 
independence, in order to investigate and report on the agencies within 
which they reside. There may be ways by Executive Order or other 
executive action to strengthen IG independence, as Docksey suggests may 
be required by EU law.
    As discussed above, the PCLOB plays the role of independent 
supervisory agency most closely analogous to the supervisory agencies 
that exist in the EU. Due to its independence, I am not sure the extent 
to which the PCLOB would be bound by an Executive Order or other 
presidential action. Nonetheless, one promising approach would be if 
the PCLOB entered into a legally-binding Memorandum of Understanding 
(MOU) with an Executive Branch agency. This MOU would be a public 
commitment by the PCLOB and the Executive Branch agency to act in 
agreed-upon ways to conduct fact-finding. To the extent that the EU has 
questions about the legal enforceability in court of such an MOU, any 
agreement with the U.S. leading to adequacy could be conditional on the 
MOU remaining in force. As with other adequacy determinations, the EU 
would periodically assess how procedures are working in practice, and 
the EU could therefore withdraw its adequacy finding if the MOU were 
not followed.
    In conclusion on the fact-finding phase, there would appear to be 
considerable scope for executive action and/or agreements between 
agencies to put in place effective fact-finding mechanisms for 
individual redress. Drafting of such measures can be informed by the 
insights offered by Christopher Docksey in his articles, and from other 
experts.
B. Judicial Review by the FISC
    As described in the Propp/Swire proposal, Congress can provide by 
statute for an appeal to go to the FISC. The discussion here suggests a 
legal approach, without the need for a statute, that may also enable 
appeal to the judges in the FISC. The basic idea is that the U.S. 
Government could request review by the FISC, as part of the court's 
inherent authority to review implementation of its Section 702 orders. 
The U.S. Government could promise, such as in an agreement with the EU, 
that it will petition the FISC to review each complaint under the 
redress system in this manner. As a result, independent Federal judges 
would provide judicial review of the complaints, and have authority to 
issue binding orders in the event of violations.
    The approach discussed here has not been published previously, so I 
offer it as an initial public draft, with relatively detailed citations 
to relevant authorities.
1. FISC Oversight of Section 702 Orders

    The proposed approach would build on existing FISC supervision of 
national security surveillance. Judges in the FISC issue binding legal 
orders about how requirements apply for any surveillance under Section 
702. FISC authorizes Section 702 surveillance each year by entering an 
order that evaluates the conduct of the 702 program over the past year, 
imposes new restrictions or requirements as appropriate, and approves 
targeting, querying, and minimization procedures for U.S. intelligence 
agencies. 50 U.S.C. Sec. 1881a(j)(3) (requiring FISC to ``enter an 
order'' authorizing 702 program if government's annual certification 
meets statutory and constitutional requirements); see also, e.g., In re 
Government's Ex Parte Submission of Reauthorization Certifications and 
Related Procedures, Case caption redacted (Foreign Int. Surv. Ct. Dec. 
6, 2019), available here (order authorizing 2019 Section 702 
intelligence programs).
    In the U.S. legal system, Federal judges have ``inherent 
authority'' under Article III of the Constitution to take judicial 
action in order to ensure compliance with judicial orders. FISC has 
Article III authority. See, e.g., In re: Certification of Questions of 
Law to the Foreign Intelligence Court of Review, No. FISCR 18-01, at 8 
(FISA Ct. Rev. Mar. 16, 2018), available here (``FISC's authority . . . 
is cabined by--and consistent with--Article III of the Constitution). 
Further, FISA expressly ensures FISC can exercise this authority in 
regards to FISC's own orders, stating that ``[n]othing in [FISA] shall 
be construed to reduce or contravene the inherent authority of [FISC] 
to determine or enforce compliance with an order or . . . a procedure 
approved by [FISC].''
    Under the proposed approach, the U.S. Government would essentially 
ask the FISC to do no more than exercise its inherent authority as an 
Article III court, to review that 702 intelligence activities conducted 
in regards to a specific individual complied with the FISC's own 702 
authorization order and applicable law.
    This approach would fit with FISC's general monitoring of the 
intelligence community's compliance with its orders and U.S. 
surveillance laws. The FISC Rules of Procedure already require the 
government to report any noncompliance with a FISC order. See FISC Rule 
of Procedure 13(b) (requiring the government to report all cases where 
``any authority or approval granted by [FISC] has been implemented in a 
manner that did not comply with [FISC's] authorization or applicable 
law''). The FISC itself has not hesitated to monitor and, if warranted, 
aggressively enforce compliance with its orders. Examples include the 
FISC's questioning the NSA's compliance with FISC orders governing the 
post-9/11 Internet metadata program, ultimately leading to the 
program's termination, or the FISC's more recent orders requiring the 
government to respond to the DOJ Inspector General's findings relating 
to the Carter Page and other FISA warrant cases, both of which are 
discussed in Appendix 2 to today's testimony.
    Put another way, this approach fits well within the joint, ongoing 
system of oversight for 702 surveillance that the FISC and the U.S. 
Government already work together to provide. The Government subjects 
702 surveillance to a range of oversight mechanisms, including day-to-
day supervision within intelligence agencies, supervision by the 
Oversight Section in DOJ's National Security Division (NSD), and 
regular joint on-site audits of 702 surveillance by NSD and ODNI. See, 
e.g., Joint Unclassified Statement to the H. Comm. on the Judiciary, 
114th Cong. 4 (2016), available here. Existing FISC orders also require 
the government to report violations of 702 authorization orders. See 
PCLOB 702 Report at 29-30 (referencing a still-classified 2009 FISC 
opinion imposing reporting requirements). All compliance incidents 
identified through these processes are reported to the FISC. The FISC 
reviews these compliance incidents as part of its annual 702 
reauthorization. This review can give rise to FISC requiring 
remediation or imposing new restrictions on intelligence activities in 
its 702 authorization orders.
    The approach also seems to fit within procedural, jurisdictional, 
and national-security constraints under which the FISC operates:

   The U.S. Government is entitled to ask FISC for relief. The 
        FISC Rules of Procedure generally require ``the government'' or 
        ``a party'' to file pleadings requesting relief from FISC. See, 
        e.g., FISC Rules of Procedure 6(a)-(b) (permitting ``the 
        government'' to request certain relief); 6(c)-(d) (permitting 
        ``a party'' to request certain relief); 19(a) (permitting ``the 
        government'' to file show-cause motions); 62(a) (permitting ``a 
        party'' to move for publication of FISC decisions). If an 
        individual were to file a petition with the FISC, this could 
        give rise to questions about whether she is ``a party'' 
        entitled to request relief. But it would seem clear that a 
        motion from the U.S. Government would be from ``the 
        government'' as contemplated under FISC rules.

   The U.S. Government should not face standing hurdles. When 
        non-governmental parties have requested relief from FISC in the 
        past, FISC has required them to plead Article III standing. 
        See, e.g., In re Opinions & Orders of this Court Addressing 
        Bulk Collection of Data under [FISA], Misc. 13-08 (Foreign Int. 
        Surv. Ct. Nov. 9, 2017), available here (chronicling litigation 
        over whether ACLU had Art. III standing to request that FISC 
        publish orders relating to Section 215 programs). In contrast, 
        the U.S. Government is already entitled to obtain 702 
        authorization orders from FISC in ex parte proceedings, without 
        needing to show standing. The Government should thus also be 
        able to ask FISC to review and enforce compliance in connection 
        with those same 702 orders.

   National security interests remain protected. In recent 
        decisions, the FISA Court of Review has reasserted the FISC's 
        ``unique'' national-security need to maintain secrecy. See, 
        e.g., In re: Certification of Questions of Law to the Foreign 
        Intelligence Court of Review, No. FISCR 18-01, at 3 (FISA Ct. 
        Rev. Mar. 16, 2018), available here (emphasizing that ``[t]he 
        very nature of [FISC's] work . . . requires that it be 
        conducted in secret,'' and that FISC orders ``often contain 
        highly sensitive information'' whose release ``could be 
        damaging to national security''). The proposed approach would 
        not require FISC to disclose classified information, or 
        otherwise impair the secrecy under which FISC normally 
        operates.
2. What would the FISC Review?

    A non-statutory proposal would need to define the scope of 
oversight the FISC can and would review. The statutory text of Section 
702 states that the FISC oversees the targeting, querying, and 
minimization procedures of intelligence agencies. Based on that text, 
the FISC would have oversight at least over those procedures, but 
perhaps not more broadly. The EU potentially could seek very broad 
oversight, along the lines of ``full compliance with all the rights of 
a data subject'' under EU law. Defining the scope of oversight would 
quite possibly be an important subject of negotiation between the U.S. 
and EU.
    Scope of FISC's subject-matter jurisdiction. The FISC can only 
operate within its subject-matter jurisdiction. Recent decisions of the 
FISA Court of Review have discussed the FISC's defined subject-matter 
jurisdiction, which may prevent non-parties from requesting relief that 
merely ``relates to the FISC or the FISA,'' as opposed to relief 
expressly authorized by FISA. See, e.g., In re Opinions & Orders by the 
FISC Addressing Bulk Collection of Data under [FISA], FISCR 20-01 at 
18-19 (FISA Ct. Rev. Apr. 24, 2020), available here (holding FISCR did 
not have subject-matter jurisdiction to adjudicate ACLU request to 
declassify portions of Section 215 orders). The proposed approach, 
however, would merely ask FISC to confirm compliance with its own 
orders, which FISA expressly authorizes FISC to do.
    Possibly build agreement with the EU into the scope of the 
targeting, querying, and minimization procedures. One potentially 
fruitful path is to include EU-relevant provisions in the annual 
authorizations by the FISC of Section 702. For instance, the targeting 
procedures might adopt language responsive to EU legal concerns, such 
as stating that targeting shall be done only as necessary and 
proportionate. If the FISC order concerning 702 required necessity and 
proportionality--key terms within EU law--then the FISC presumably 
could oversee implementation of those necessity and proportionality 
requirements. The U.S. Government would have the ability to request 
such language, or other language negotiated with the EU, in the 
targeting procedures, as part of its regular legal submissions to the 
FISC. The FISC could issue binding requirements on U.S. agencies to 
ensure compliance with its Section 702 orders.
    Due to the defined subject matter jurisdiction of the FISC, the 
court quite possibly would not have judicial authority to rule on the 
legality of surveillance under EO 12,333. The FISC review above is 
predicated on the FISC's authority to oversee implementation of Section 
702 orders, but the FISC has no similar statutory authority over an 
executive order, such as EO 12333.
    I offer five observations about EO 12,333:

   First, the fact-finding phase, potentially including 
        intelligence agencies and the PCLOB, could apply to both 
        Section 702 and EO 12,333. Perhaps legal theories could be 
        developed about how the FISC could review, as an ancillary 
        matter, the portion of the record pertaining to EO 12,333. My 
        tentative conclusion, however, is that review of EO 12,333 
        surveillance would be outside of the scope of the FISC's 
        authority, absent statutory change.

   Second, EO 12,333 surveillance may be sufficiently protected 
        by the procedural steps before the complaint gets to the FISC. 
        The PCLOB or an agency procedure, for instance, could be the 
        final arbiter on EO 12,333 issues. Docksey specifically 
        presents arguments about why a PCLOB decision might meet EU 
        legal requirements.

   Third, the Commerce Department White Paper contains multiple 
        arguments about why no further legal protections should be 
        required for companies using standard contractual clauses. 
        Importantly, for instance, the White Paper states that it is 
        unclear how companies can ``consider any U.S. national security 
        data access other than targeted government requirements for 
        disclosure such as under FISA 702.'' Under these approaches, 
        the U.S. government has thus articulated reasons why the scope 
        of individual redress should match Section 702, rather than 
        including EO 12,333.

   Fourth, in practice, many companies are addressing EO 12,333 
        by taking additional safeguards with respect to secure 
        communications when personal data leaves the EU, such as to 
        come to the U.S. There is ongoing discussion among European 
        actors about the extent to which use of strong encryption 
        answers EU legal concerns about EO 12,333 surveillance. If such 
        use of encryption turns out to meet EU legal requirements, then 
        individual redress can apply to the cases where it is relevant, 
        under Section 702.

   Fifth, and if the previous observations do not apply, I 
        present as another possible approach the following analysis of 
        why an effective regime of individual redress may meet the EU 
        legal standard of ``essential equivalence,'' even if EO 12,333 
        is outside of that regime. In recent cases concerning data 
        retention, the CJEU highlighted its jurisdiction where a 
        government achieves surveillance via private actors, such as 
        companies subject to a judicial order. By contrast, the CJEU 
        did not say that it had jurisdiction, in the face of the 
        national security exception to its jurisdiction, where a 
        government performs surveillance directly (not through a 
        private company). Judicial orders to private companies apply to 
        Section 702, but not to government activities under EO 12,333. 
        With the disclaimer that I am a U.S. lawyer, perhaps it is 
        worth considering whether the EU ``essentially equivalent'' 
        regime of individual redress, to that offered by the EU Member 
        States, might apply only to judicially ordered actions by 
        companies, that is, to Section 702. With the same disclaimer, 
        the same limit on ``national security'' jurisdiction does not 
        apply to the European Court of Human Rights, and potentially 
        its jurisprudence would apply to the direct government actions 
        under EO 12,333.
Conclusion
    This document has attempted to set before this Committee and the 
public research to date about how to create a system of individual 
redress under U.S. law. Standing doctrine, under Article III of the 
U.S. constitution, can block many proposed ideas for offering 
individual redress to an individual. The Propp/Swire proposal explained 
how the analogy to FOIA can require an agency to act, with a court then 
empowered to review the agency action. Christopher Docksey has 
supplemented the initial proposal with his expert insights about EU 
legal requirements. The new discussion here then presents ways that 
valid individual redress might be created by the U.S. government, even 
before Congress is able to enact a statute.
    Members of this Committee and other U.S policymakers may doubt 
whether it is desirable as a policy matter to create such systems of 
individual redress for EU citizens. In response, there is this simple 
point--the highest court of the European Union has stated, apparently 
as a matter of its constitutional law, that such individual redress is 
required. Absent a valid system of individual redress, any future 
agreement between the U.S. and EU will be subject to great risk of 
invalidation. Faced with that reality, the proposals here seek to 
present possible solutions. Creative alternative proposals are most 
welcome, and the task is important.
                                 ______
                                 
   ``Updates to U.S. Foreign Intelligence Law Since 2016 Testimony''

         Appendix 2 to U.S. Senate Commerce Committee Testimony

          on ``The Invalidation of the EU-U.S. Privacy Shield

              and the Future of Transatlantic Data Flows''

                             Peter Swire\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ Elizabeth and Tommy Holder Chair of Law and Ethics, Georgia 
Tech Scheller College of Business; Research Director, Cross-Border Data 
Forum; senior counsel, Alston & Bird LLP. The opinions expressed here 
are my own, and should not be attributed to the Cross-Border Data Forum 
or any client. For research assistance on this appendix I thank Daniel 
Felz and Sara Guercio. This Appendix is based on publicly available 
information; I have not had access to any relevant classified 
information since 2016. The views expressed here are my own.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    This Appendix supplements written testimony I am submitting to the 
Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation for the 
December 9, 2020 hearing on ``The Invalidation of the EU-U.S. Privacy 
Shield and the Future of Transatlantic Data Flows.'' This Appendix 
presents updates on the U.S. legal and regulatory regime for foreign 
intelligence surveillance that have occurred since testimony I provided 
to the Irish High Court in 2016 on the same subject (the ``2016 
Testimony'').\2\ Taken together, the 2016 Testimony and this Appendix 
seek to present an integrated set of references that may inform ongoing 
assessments, under European Union law, of the adequacy of protection of 
personal data related to U.S. foreign intelligence law.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \2\ Peter Swire, Testimony of Peter Swire (submitted to High Court 
of Ireland Nov. 3, 2016), available at https://www.alston.com/en/
resources/peter-swire-irish-high-court-case-testimony/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    My 2016 Testimony was submitted in November 2016, several months 
after the EU Commission adopted the finalized Privacy Shield in July 
2016. At that time, I listed over twenty significant privacy-protective 
changes that had been made to U.S. foreign intelligence laws since the 
Snowden disclosures in 2013.\3\ My 2016 Testimony then discussed the 
systemic safeguards present in U.S. law for foreign intelligence, 
including: (a) safeguards anchored in the statutes governing foreign 
intelligence surveillance by U.S. agencies,\4\ (b) interlocking 
executive, legislative, and independent oversight mechanisms that are 
in place for surveillance activities;\5\ (c) transparency mechanisms 
implemented since the Snowden disclosures that offered a level of 
transparency into U.S. surveillance practices unparalleled in other 
nations;\6\ and (d) privacy safeguards implemented within the Executive 
Branch to protect personal information of non-US persons.\7\ Chapter 5 
of my 2016 Testimony also contained a detailed discussion of 
declassified opinions of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court 
(FISC), including my assessment that the FISC has exercised careful and 
effective oversight over foreign intelligence surveillance.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \3\ See id. at 3-10--3-12.
    \4\ See id. at 3-12--3-26.
    \5\ See id. at 3-26--3-34.
    \6\ See id. at 3-34--3-38.
    \7\ See id. at 3-39--3-49.
    \8\ See id. at 5-1--5-53.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    This Appendix highlights updates that have occurred since the 2016 
period in which Privacy Shield and my Testimony was finalized. As an 
overview of what will be discussed in this Appendix, the following 
represents a summary of intervening developments that have resulted in 
greater safeguards, or the continued effectiveness of safeguards in 
place, since the 2016 period in which Privacy Shield and my prior 
Testimony were finalized:

   1.  The FISA Amendments Reauthorization Act of 2017 (FARA) 
        introduced new safeguards for Section 702 programs, including:

      (a)  mandating querying procedures for 702-acquired information,

      (b)  codifying the National Security Agency (NSA) and Federal 
            Bureau of Investigation (FBI) practice of appointing 
            Privacy and Civil Liberties Officers,

      (c)  expanding whistleblower protections to Intelligence 
            Community (IC) contractors,

      (d)  increasing disclosure and transparency requirements for 
            Section 702 programs, and

      (e)  imposing significant restrictions on the recommencement of 
            Abouts collection.

   2.  The FISC has continued to annually evaluate Section 702 
        surveillance as required under Section 702, and its 
        reauthorization orders have resulted in new protections for 
        Section 702 programs.

   3.  As a result of FISC's continued supervision of Abouts collection 
        the NSA (a) voluntarily terminated Abouts collection and (b) 
        segregated and deleted all Internet transactions previously 
        acquired through its Upstream program.

   4.  The Office of Director of National Intelligence (ODNI) has 
        continued to declassify significant documents relating to 
        Section 702 surveillance, such as publishing the Section 702 
        trainings that NSA provides to its internal personnel that 
        conduct Section 702 programs on a day-to-day basis.

   5.  Due in part to compliance incidents reported to the FISC, NSA 
        decided to delete three years' worth of Call Detail Records 
        (CDRs) obtained under the USA FREEDOM Act. NSA then decided to 
        suspend its CDR program in early 2019.

   6.  The Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board (PCLOB) issued 
        new oversight reports on (a) the NSA's Call Detail Records 
        program under the USA FREEDOM Act, as well as (b) the 
        implementation of Presidential Policy Directive 28 (PPD-28) in 
        U.S. intelligence agencies. PCLOB also recently announced it 
        concluded an oversight review of the U.S. Treasury Department's 
        Terrorist Finance Training Program.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \9\ See generally U.S. Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Bd., 
Press Release: Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board Concludes 
Review of Treasury Department's Terrorist Finance Tracking Program, 
(Nov. 19, 2019) available at https://documents.pclob.gov/prod/
Documents/Events
AndPress/de7972f6-03f1-48fd-8acd-b719a658e4a0/
TFTP%20Board%20Statement.pdf. PCLOB Chairman Adam Klein also issued a 
statement describing EU decisions to rely on TFTP instead of building 
its own equivalent program, and identifying privacy protective measures 
in place for EU citizens within TFTP, such as storage of EU bank 
customer data in the EU. See U.S. Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight 
Bd., Statement by Chairman Adam Klein on the Terrorist Finance Tracking 
Program, (Nov. 19, 2020) available at: https://documents.pclob.gov/
prod/Documents/EventsAndPress/b8ce341a-71d5-4cdd-a101-219454bfa459/
TFTP%20Chairman%20Statement%
2011_19_20.pdf.

   7.  The ODNI has continued to publish annual Statistical 
        Transparency Reports showing numerical statistics that provide 
        transparency on the extent to which U.S. agencies are 
        requesting data under FISA authorities, including Section 702 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
        authorities.

   8.  The Department of Justice (DOJ) and ODNI continue to publish 
        Semiannual Reports on the NSA's, FBI's, and CIA's compliance 
        with Section 702 requirements, including statistics and 
        descriptions of instances of non-compliance. These Reports 
        continue to be created as a result of DOJ/ODNI's regular on-
        site reviews of the intelligence agencies.

   9.  U.S. foreign intelligence law continues to permit companies to 
        publish transparency reports. My review of leading technology 
        companies' recent transparency reports shows that, as in 2016, 
        U.S. intelligence appears to affect a vanishingly small 
        percentage of their active users.

  10.  ODNI has continued to publish significant quantities of 
        declassified documents related to U.S. foreign intelligence 
        activities on the ``IC on the Record'' website. It also 
        facilitated greater access to these documents by launching a 
        text-searchable capability on Intel.gov.

  11.  FISC has continued to declassify opinions and publish statistics 
        on its handling of government surveillance applications. The 
        percentage of applications that the FISC has modified or denied 
        has increased since 2016.

    This Appendix discussed the above developments in eight Sections 
that track the structure of my 2016 Testimony: 1) updates to systemic 
safeguards for U.S. foreign intelligence, 2) updates to Section 702 
programs, 3) updates to the former 215 program, 4) updates to oversight 
safeguards, 5) updates to transparency safeguards, 6) updates to 
executive safeguards, 7) updates to Foreign Intelligence Surveillance 
Court (FISC) testimony, 8) updates to surveillance-related standing 
cases.
1. Updates to Systemic Safeguards for U.S. Foreign Intelligence:
    A significant portion of my 2016 Testimony discussed the systemic 
safeguards built into the structure of foreign intelligence in the 
United States.\10\ The core and structure of these safeguards has 
remained unchanged since I testified in 2016. The U.S. remains a 
constitutional democracy committed to the rule of law in conducting 
foreign-intelligence surveillance.\11\ Further, U.S. surveillance 
remains subject to an interconnected system of statutory 
safeguards,\12\ oversight mechanisms,\13\ transparency mechanisms,\14\ 
and Executive Branch safeguards.\15\ My detailed discussion of these 
safeguards can be read in my 2016 Testimony, as outlined in the 
introduction above.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \10\ See generally Swire, supra note 2 at 3-2--3-49.
    \11\ See id. at 3-2--3-6.
    \12\ See id. 3-12--3-26.
    \13\ See id. at 3-26--3-34.
    \14\ See id. at 3-34--3-38.
    \15\ See id. at 3-39--3-49.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
2. Updates to Section 702 Programs.
    Section 702 of FISA is the basis for significant foreign 
intelligence collection by U.S. intelligence agencies, and was 
discussed at length in my 2016 Testimony.\16\ Since 2016, the legal 
structure of Section 702 has remained largely unchanged. Section 702 
requires the Attorney General and DNI to annually apply to the Foreign 
Intelligence Surveillance Court (FISC) to authorize Section 702 
surveillance programs.\17\ In doing so, the FISC reviews and authorizes 
the targeting, minimization, and (since 2018) querying procedures under 
which the intelligence agencies conduct Section 702 surveillance.\18\ 
Throughout the ensuing year, the agencies' conduct of Section 702 
programs is monitored by internal procedures, external audits, and 
regular reporting to the FISC and Congress.\19\ The primary programs 
that exist under Section 702 remain (a) the Prism program, in which 
agencies such as the NSA serve directives on communications providers 
compelling the disclosure of communications to or from a tasked 
selector; and (b) the Upstream program, in which Internet backbone 
providers acquire communications to or from a tasked selector as they 
traverse the Internet.\20\ My 2016 Testimony discusses the structure of 
Section 702 as well as its primary programs in detail.\21\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \16\ See id. at 3-18--3-24.
    \17\ See id. at 3-18--3-21.
    \18\ See id.
    \19\ See generally id.at 3-2--3-49.
    \20\ See generally id.at 3-18--3-24.
    \21\ See id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Despite broad continuity in Section 702 practice since my 2016 
Testimony, a number of significant updates have occurred. This Section 
briefly summarizes a selection of these changes: (a) the FISA 
Amendments Act Reauthorization Act of 2017 and its privacy-protective 
aspects; (b) the FISC continues to reauthorize the Section 702 programs 
annually; (c) NSA terminated Upstream's Abouts collection in connection 
with 2017 FISC Reauthorization; (d) statistics on 702 programs continue 
to be released by the U.S. government; (e) the U.S. government 
continues to publish the Semiannual Assessment of compliance for 702 
programs; and, (f) NSA declassified its internal guidance and training 
manuals for 702 programs.
a. FISA Amendments Reauthorization Act of 2017 (FARA)
    In 2018, the FISA Amendments Reauthorization Act of 2017 (FARA) was 
passed, reauthorizing FISA for a five-year term and providing 
additional oversight and privacy protections.\22\ Specifically, FARA i) 
mandated that intelligence agencies adopt querying procedures governing 
how they may access and use Section 702 intelligence; ii) codified the 
appointment of Privacy and Civil Liberties Officers in the NSA and FBI; 
iii) expanded whistleblower protections; iv) increased agency 
disclosure requirements; and v) required an approval process if the NSA 
wishes to restart Abouts collections.\23\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \22\ See FISA Amendments Reauthorization Act of 2017, Pub. L. 115-
118, (2018) [hereinafter ``FARA''].
    \23\ See generally id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
i. Mandatory Querying Procedures
    Before FARA, Section 702 mandated that intelligence agencies adopt 
``targeting'' and ``minimization'' procedures, which collectively 
provided the standards by which individuals are targeted for foreign 
intelligence surveillance and how subsequently acquired communications 
may be retained and used. FARA added a requirement that the NSA, FBI, 
CIA, and NCTC adopt ``querying'' procedures governing how these 
agencies are permitted to access and search 702-acquired 
communications.\24\ Like targeting and minimization procedures, Section 
702 querying procedures must be annually submitted to the FISC for 
approval, and FISC must evaluate them for consistency with FISA and 
``the requirements of the Fourth Amendment.'' \25\ While FARA set forth 
specific requirements for U.S. person queries,\26\ the querying 
procedures adopted by U.S. intelligence agencies contain safeguards for 
all individuals regardless of nationality. For example, the NSA's 2019 
Querying Procedures state that ``[e]ach query of NSA systems containing 
unminimized content or noncontent information acquired pursuant to 
section 702 . . . must be reasonably likely to retrieve foreign 
intelligence information.'' \27\ These requirements, and FISC's annual 
review of how they are followed by U.S. intelligence agencies, help 
support proportional use of communications acquired under Section 702.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \24\ Id. Sec. 101.
    \25\ Id. Sec. 101(a)(1)(B)(f)(1) (2018).
    \26\ Id. Sec. 109 (2018).
    \27\ Nat'l Sec. Agency, Querying Procedures Used by the National 
Security Agency in Connection with Acquisitions of Foreign Intelligence 
Information Pursuant to Section 702 of the Foreign Intelligence 
Surveillance Act of 1978, As Amended, 3 (Sept. 16, 2019), available at: 
https://www.intelligence.gov/assets/documents/702%20Documents/
declassified/2019_702_Cert_NSA_
Querying_ 17Sep19_OCR.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
ii. Ratification of Appointment of PCLOs within Agencies
    Under its Section 109, FARA expressly required the NSA and FBI to 
appoint Privacy and Civil Liberties Officers (PCLOs).\28\ This change 
represented more of a change in law than in practice, since both NSA 
and FBI already had active PCLOs in place as a matter of internal 
policy before FARA was enacted.\29\ Nonetheless, FARA's express 
codification of NSA's and FBI's prior practice represents Congress's 
approval of the IC practice of installing oversight and privacy 
protection offices directly within the agencies that conduct foreign 
intelligence surveillance.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \28\ FARA Sec. 106.
    \29\ Office of the Dir. of Nat'l Intelligence,, The FISA Amendments 
Reauthorization Act of 2017: Enhanced Privacy Safeguards for Personal 
Data Transfers Under Privacy Shield, 3 (Oct. 15, 2018) available at: 
https://www.dni.gov/files/documents/icotr/Summary-FISA-Reauthorization-
of-2017--10.15.18.pdf [hereinafter ``DNI FARA Summary''].
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
iii. Expansion of Whistleblower Protections
    FARA extended available whistleblower protections to contract 
employees working within U.S. intelligence agencies.\30\ Prior to FARA, 
``contractors were protected from agency management retaliation,'' but 
not from retaliation from the contractor's direct employer.\31\ FARA 
thus extended whistleblower protections to prohibit retaliation against 
a whistleblowing IC contractor by the contractor's employer.\32\ As a 
result, IC contractors can report deficiencies or violation to the 
inspectors general of U.S. intelligence agencies and, as permitted by 
law, to the Senate and House intelligence committees.\33\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \30\ FARA Sec. 110.
    \31\ DNI FARA Summary, supra note 29.
    \32\ See id.
    \33\ See Swire, supra note 2 at 3-28--3-29.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
iv. Increased Disclosure Requirements
    FARA introduced a number of new disclosure requirements for 
intelligence agencies. First, FARA requires future ODNI Statistical 
Transparency Reports agencies to separately state the number of U.S. 
persons and non-US persons that were targets of electronic 
surveillance.\34\ Second, FARA formally mandates that agencies' Section 
702 minimization procedures be published.\35\ Third, FARA requires the 
Attorney General to provide new reporting to Congress on the number of 
surveillance applications and emergency authorizations,\36\ and to make 
each report publicly available and unclassified ``to the extent 
consistent with national security.'' \37\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \34\ FARA Sec. 102(b).
    \35\ Id. Sec. 104 (2018). Although agencies' minimization 
procedures have already been declassified and published for each year 
in which the corresponding Section 702 reauthorization was published, 
this change may result in minimization procedures being published even 
when the underlying reauthorization is not.
    \36\ Id. Sec. 107.
    \37\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
v. Requirements for Resuming Abouts Collections
    Abouts collection was an aspect of the NSA's Upstream program. As 
discussed more fully in Section 2(d) below, following significant 
interaction with the FISC on the lawfulness of Abouts communication, 
the NSA voluntarily discontinued Abouts collections in March 2017. FARA 
now ensures that both the FISC and Congress must be informed before 
Abouts collection can be revived. If the NSA wishes to resume 
``intentional acquisition of [A]bouts communication,'' several 
requirements must be met.\38\ First, FISC must issue a certification 
approving the program and ``a summary of the protections in place to 
detect any material breach.'' \39\ Second, the NSA must notify Congress 
in writing 30 days before resuming Abouts collection, and cannot begin 
Abouts collection within that thirty-day window.\40\ The FISC's order 
approving the recommencement of Abouts collection must be attached to 
the notice provided to Congress.\41\ Third, if Abouts collection 
resumes after having satisfied the prior two requirements, the NSA must 
report all material breaches to Congress.\42\ Finally, any FISC opinion 
certifying the recommencement of Section 702 Abouts collection will be 
designated as a ``novel or significant interpretation of the law,'' 
thus requiring appointment of an amicus curiae during authorization 
proceedings, as well as public release of the opinion.\43\ The presence 
of these requirements within the amended Section 702 adds another level 
of oversight to the NSA's collection of Section 702 data.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \38\ Id. Sec. 103.
    \39\ Id Sec. 103(b)(3).
    \40\ Id. Sec. 103(b)(2).
    \41\ Id. Sec. 103(b)(3).
    \42\ Id. Sec. 103(b)(5). Material breaches include ``significant 
noncompliance with applicable law or an order of the FISC concerning 
any acquisition of Abouts communication,'' see id. Sec. 103(b)(1)(B). 
It can be presumed that other compliance incidents, whether material or 
not, would be reported to the FISC, as this is the FISC's current 
requirement for Section 702 programs.
    \43\ Id. Sec. 103(b)(6); see also USA FREEDOM Act, Pub. L. 114-23, 
Sec. 602(a) (2017).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
b. FISC Continued to Evaluate 702 Compliance During Annual 
        Reauthorizations
    As stated above, FISC must annually review and reauthorize Section 
702 programs. Since my prior testimony, FISC has reauthorized Section 
702 programs on at least three occasions: in April 2017,\44\ October 
2018,\45\ and December 2019.\46\ For each of these reauthorizations, 
the U.S. government declassified and published (a) the FISC order 
evaluating and reauthorizing Section 702 programs; and (b) the 
targeting, minimization, and (starting in 2018) querying procedures 
approved by the FISC to govern the conduct of Section 702 
surveillance.\47\ For the 2016 reauthorization, the government also 
declassified the ODNI/Attorney General certification and the NSA 
Director's affidavit submitted to FISC.\48\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \44\ See generally Mem. Op. & Order [Redacted], Case Caption 
[Redacted] (F.I.S.C. Apr. 26, 2017) available at: https://www.dni.gov/
files/documents/icotr/51117/2016_Cert_FISC_Memo_
Opin_Order_Apr_2017.pdf [hereinafter ``FISC 2016/2017 
Reauthorization''].
    \45\ See generally Order [Redacted], Case Caption [Redacted] 
(F.I.S.C. Oct. 18, 2018) available at: https://www.intelligence.gov/
assets/documents/702%20Documents/declassified/2018_Cert_
FISC_Opin_18Oct18.pdf [hereinafter ``FISC 2018 Reauthorization''].
    \46\ See generally Mem. Op. & Order [Redacted], Case Caption 
[Redacted] (F.I.S.C. Dec. 6, 2019) available at: https://
www.intelligence.gov/assets/documents/702%20Documents/declassified/
2019_702_Cert_FISC_Opinion_06Dec19_OCR.pdf [hereinafter ``FISC 2019 
Reauthorization''].
    \47\ See generally FISC 2016/2017 Reauthorization, supra note 44; 
FISC 2018 Reauthorization, supra note 45; FISC 2019 Reauthorization, 
supra note 46.
    \48\ See generally FISC 2016/2017 Reauthorization, supra note 44.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The FISC reauthorization opinions show the FISC conducting the 
careful and detailed oversight over Section 702 surveillance I 
discussed in my 2016 Testimony.\49\ FISC continued to examine how 
Section 702 programs ``have been and will be implemented'' in 
practice.\50\ It also crafted new requirements for compliance with 
Section 702. As brief examples of FISC's review:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \49\ See generally Swire, supra note 2 at 5-1--5-53.
    \50\ Mem. Op. & Order [Redacted], Case Caption [Redacted], 3 
(F.I.S.C. Aug. 26, 2014), available at https://www.dni.gov/files/
documents/0928/FISC%20Memorandum%20Opinion%20and%20
Order%2026%20August%202014.pdf; See also Swire, supra note 2 at 5-12--
5-14.

   The 2016 reauthorization opinion is 99 pages long.\51\ The 
        FISC evaluated the NSA's reports of compliance incidents 
        relating to Abouts collection, and the NSA's decision to 
        terminate Abouts collection in response (discussed immediately 
        below). Further, the FISC evaluated the NCTC receiving access 
        to Section 702 information, NSA data deletion questions, and 
        potential issues relating to NSA's Upstream program that had 
        occurred in the past year. The FISC also evaluated the NSA's 
        use of automated tools for tasking decisions; determined that 
        reliance on these tools was not sufficient to task a selector; 
        and required the NSA to begin reporting incidents where the NSA 
        did not conduct post-tasking review of acquired communications 
        to determine whether a tasking decision has been proper.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \51\ See FISC 2016/2017 Reauthorization, supra note 44; Due to 
extensions granted to review Abouts collection which extended 
reauthorization proceedings, the 2016 reauthorization appears to have 
covered Section 702 surveillance in both the years 2016 and 2017. The 
Attorney General and ODNI filed certifications to reauthorize Section 
702 surveillance on September 26, 2016. See also Government's Ex Parte 
Submission of Reauthorization Certifications and Related Procedures, Ex 
Parte Submission of Amended Certifications, and Request for an Order 
Approving Such Certifications and Amended Certifications [Redacted], 
(F.I.S.C. Sept. 26, 2016) available at: https://www.dni.gov/files/
documents/icotr/51117/2016_Certification_Cover_Filing_Sep_26_
2016_part_1_and_2_-merged.pdf. In evaluating Abouts collection issues, 
FISC granted extensions into March 2017, at which point NSA announced 
it was terminating Abouts collection. FISC then issued its 
reauthorization order on April 26, 2017. This reauthorization thus 
appears to have authorized Section 702 programs for 2016 and 2017.

   The 2018 reauthorization opinion is 138 pages long.\52\ In 
        its most lengthy discussion, the FISC found FBI querying 
        practices involving U.S. person identities were inconsistent 
        with the Fourth Amendment; this finding was appealed to the 
        FISA Court of Review, which affirmed the FISC,\53\ resulting in 
        the FBI modifying its minimization and querying procedures.\54\ 
        Additionally, in a novel and significant decision, the FISC 
        held that FARA restrictions on Abouts collection also applied 
        to certain non-Abouts collection. Although the precise 
        collection technique at issue remained redacted, FISC ordered 
        the NSA to report each time it tasked a selector using this 
        technique within 10 days to FISC, presumably to monitor on an 
        ongoing basis that NSA's acquisitions complied with the 
        restrictions of FARA.\55\ For this decision, the FISC invited 
        and received amicus briefing.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \52\ See FISC 2018 Reauthorization, supra note 45.
    \53\ See In Re: DNI/AG 702(h) Certifications 2018 [Redacted], Dkt. 
No. [Redacted] (F.I.S.A. Ct. Rev. July 12, 2019) available at: https://
www.intelligence.gov/assets/documents/702%20Docu
ments/declassified/2018_Cert_FISCR_Opinion_12Jul19.pdf.
    \54\ See Mem. Op. & Order [Redacted], Case No. [Redacted] (F.I.S.C. 
Sept. 4, 2019) available at: https://www.intelligence.gov/assets/
documents/702%20Documents/declassified/2018_Cert_
FISC_Opinion_04Sep19.pdf
    \55\ See FISC 2018 Reauthorization, supra note 45 at 136-138.

   The 2019 reauthorization opinion is 83 pages long.\56\ It 
        addressed questions about whether the NSA may share information 
        with FBI for targeting purposes, as well as the retention 
        period for Upstream collection after termination of Abouts 
        collection. Additionally, FISC addressed whether 702-acquired 
        information could be captured by intelligence agencies' ``user-
        activity monitoring'' (AUM) activities, such as insider threat 
        protection. The FISC preliminarily approved AUM activities, but 
        required all agencies to provide further reporting on the 
        extent of their AUM activities and the amount of 702-acquired 
        information affected by it.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \56\ See FISC 2019 Reauthorization, supra note 46.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
c. NSA Terminated Upstream's Abouts Collection in Connection with 
        FISC's 2017 Section 702 Reauthorization
    The NSA's termination of Abouts collection represents a significant 
development that has occurred since my 2016 Testimony and illustrates 
the effectiveness of the U.S. system of safeguards for foreign 
intelligence surveillance. Abouts collection referred to an aspect of 
the NSA's Section 702 Upstream program. It acquired communications that 
were not to or from a tasked selector, but which instead mentioned the 
selector (and were thus described as being ``about'' that selector). An 
example would be the NSA receiving an e-mail where the selector e-mail 
address of the target is included in the body or text of the e-mail, 
but neither sent nor received that e-mail.\57\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \57\ Nat'l Sec. Agency, NSA Stops Certain 702 ``Upstream'' 
Activities, PA-014-18, (Apr. 28, 2017), available at: https://
www.nsa.gov/news-features/press-room/Article/1618699/nsa-stops-certain-
section-702-upstream-activities/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Abouts collection first came to FISC's attention in 2011, when it 
raised concerns due to acquisition of Multi-Communication Transactions 
(MCTs).\58\ E-mails and similar communications are often not 
transmitted through the Internet as discrete communications, but 
instead as part of MCT clusters,\59\ what is often called a ``thread'' 
of e-mails. This resulted in Upstream acquiring not just communications 
containing a tasked selector, but also a further cluster of attached 
communications in which the selector did not appear.\60\ For Abouts 
communication, FISC found this raised heightened privacy concerns, 
since it resulted in the NSA acquiring communications that did not 
contain selectors.\61\ FISC thus imposed a number of restrictions on 
Abouts collection, such as requiring the NSA to segregate Abouts 
collection from other 702-acquired data, to restrict other agencies' 
access to Upstream collection, to restrict NSA analysts' use of 
Upstream-collected data, and to purge Upstream collection on a more 
expedited basis than other 702-acquired information.\62\ These 
restrictions were memorialized in NSA's Section 702 minimization 
beginning in 2011.\63\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \58\ See generally Swire, supra note 2 at 5-31--5-34.
    \59\ See Id.
    \60\ See Id.
    \61\ See Id.
    \62\ See Mem. Op. [Redacted], Case No. [Redacted] (F.I.S.C. Oct. 3, 
2011) available at: https://www.dni.gov/files/documents/0716/October-
2011-Bates-Opinion-and%20Order-20140716.pdf
    \63\ See Mem. Op. [Redacted], Case No. [Redacted] (F.I.S.C. Nov. 
30, 2011) available at: http://www.fas.org/irp/agency/doj/fisa/
fisc1111.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    It appears that in 2016, NSA's Inspector General reviewed NSA's 
querying of Upstream collections and identified ``significant 
noncompliance'' with the FISC's restrictions.\64\ This was reported to 
FISC, which held a hearing and required the government to submit a 
report on the full extent of querying practices affecting Upstream data 
as well as a remediation plan.\65\ The government provided several 
rounds of updates to the FISC; however, the FISC on several occasions 
expressed dissatisfaction with the state of the government's 
investigation into how querying practices were not complying with 
existing FISC orders.\66\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \64\ FISC 2016/2017 Reauthorization, supra note 44 at 4.
    \65\ See id.
    \66\ See id. at 4-6.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Ultimately, on March 30, 2017, the NSA reported to FISC that it 
would ``eliminate `Abouts' collection altogether.'' \67\ In addition, 
NSA stated it would ``sequester and destroy raw Upstream Internet data 
previously collected,'' and ``destroy such sequestered Internet 
transactions as soon as practicable through an accelerated age-off 
process.'' \68\ Going forward, NSA stated that any communications 
obtained by Upstream ``that are not to or from a person targeted in 
accordance with NSA's section 702 targeting procedures . . . will be 
destroyed upon recognition,'' and that NSA ``will report any 
acquisition of such communications to [FISC] as an incident of non-
compliance.'' \69\ The NSA proffered updated minimization procedures to 
the FISC that memorialized these changes to Upstream.\70\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \67\ Id. at 6.
    \68\ Id. at 23-24.
    \69\ Id.
    \70\ Id. at 26.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The FISC accepted the NSA's updated minimization procedures that 
prohibited Abouts collection.\71\ Further, as described above, FARA now 
requires the NSA to obtain FISC authorization, and provide notification 
to Congress, prior to recommencing Abouts communication.\72\ The NSA 
also publicly announced its termination of Abouts collection.\73\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \71\ See id.
    \72\ FARA Sec. 103.
    \73\ Nat'l Sec. Agency, NSA Stops Certain 702 ``Upstream'' 
Activities, PA-014-18 (Apr. 28, 2017), available at: https://
www.nsa.gov/news-features/press-room/Article/1618699/nsa-stops-certain-
section-702-upstream-activities/)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The termination of Abouts communication underscores the 
effectiveness of the U.S. system of safeguards for foreign 
intelligence. The FISC recognized privacy risks in Abouts collection 
and imposed heightened requirements on the NSA. Those requirements 
could not be met, in part due to technical challenges. Internal reviews 
identified the noncompliance; and it was reported to FISC. FISC 
insisted on compliance with its privacy restrictions, and the NSA 
determined this required Abouts collection to end.
d. Statistics on 702 Programs Continue to be Released by the U.S. 
        Government
    ODNI publishes annual Statistical Transparency Reports that 
identify the number of non-U.S. persons who are the targets of tasked 
selectors under Section 702.\74\ My 2016 Testimony referenced that in 
2015, there had been 94,368 targets of Section 702 programs.\75\ Since 
then, the Statistical Transparency Reports have provided targeting 
statistics for subsequent years.\76\ The following table provides 
statistics for targeting of non-US persons under Section 702 since 
2016:\77\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \74\ See 50 U.S.C. Sec. 1873(b)(2)(A); Swire, supra note 2 at 3-
36--3-37.
    \75\ See Swire, supra note 2 at 3-21--3-24.
    \76\ See generally Office of the Dir. of Nat'l Intelligence, 
Statistical Transparency Report: Regarding the use of National Security 
Authorities for Calendar Year 2016 (Apr. 2017) available at: https://
www.dni.gov/files/icotr/ic_transparecy_report_cy2016_5_2_17.pdf; See 
generally Office of the Dir. of Nat'l Intelligence, Statistical 
Transparency Report: Regarding the use of National Security Authorities 
for Calendar Year 2017 (Apr. 2018) available at: https://www.dni.gov/
files/documents/icotr/2018-ASTR-CY2017-FINAL-for-Release-5.4.18.pdf; 
See generally Office of the Dir. of Nat'l Intelligence, Statistical 
Transparency Report: Regarding the use of National Security Authorities 
for Calendar Year 2018, (Apr. 2019) available at: https://www.dni.gov/
files/CLPT/documents/2019_ASTR_for_CY2018.pdf; See generally Office of 
the Dir. of Nat'l Intelligence, Statistical Transparency Report: 
Regarding the use of National Security Authorities for Calendar Year 
2019 (Apr. 2020) available at: https://www.dni.gov/files/CLPT/
documents/2020_ASTR_for_CY2019_FINAL.pdf.
    \77\ Office of the Dir. of Nat'l Intelligence, Statistical 
Transparency Report: Regarding the use of National Security Authorities 
for Calendar Year 2019, 14 (Apr. 2020) available at: https://
www.dni.gov/files/CLPT/documents/2020_ASTR_for_CY2019_FINAL.pdf 
[hereinafter ``2019 Statistical Transparency Report''].

------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Calendar Year       2016          2017          2018          2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Estimated Number      106,469       129,080       164,770       204,968
 of Section 702
 Targets for Non-
 US Persons
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    I add one comment relevant to current discussions about possible 
changes in U.S. surveillance practices after Schrems II. One proposal I 
have heard would be to end the Section 702 program and have each 
selector be subject to the one-at-a-time prior approval by a judge 
under Title I of FISA, the sort of approval that applies to individuals 
in the U.S. where there is probable cause that they are ``agents of a 
foreign power.'' \78\ There are currently 11 Federal district judges on 
the FISC; processing over 100,000 individual orders per year would 
simply not be possible with anything like current staffing with the 
care and attention to each application that DOJ documents and a judge 
assesses. As discussed in my 2016 Testimony, Section 702 was created in 
2008 as an increase in legal process compared to prior collection done 
outside of the US.\79\ Adding one-at-a-time prior approval by a judge 
for each selector would thus appear to be a greater change to current 
practice than some may have realized. That is not a conclusion about 
what changes the U.S. might contemplate in discussions with the EU, but 
instead an observation about the nature of the current 702 program.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \78\ 50 U.S.C. Sec. 1801(b).
    \79\ See Swire, supra note 2 at 3-18--3-19.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
e. The U.S. Government Continued to Publish Semiannual Assessments of 
        Compliance for 702 Programs
    Section 702 requires the AG and ODNI to jointly assess intelligence 
agencies' compliance with FISA Section 702 and publish their assessment 
semiannually in a declassified report (the ``Semiannual 
Assessments'').\80\ The AG (through its National Security Division) and 
ODNI conduct regular on-site reviews of NSA, FBI, and CIA on at least a 
bimonthly basis, and they review agencies' targeting and minimization 
decisions.\81\ Using the results of these reviews, the Semiannual 
Assessments describe types, percentages, and trends of 702 non-
compliance issues. The table below summarizes the overall compliance 
rates, as well as compliance rates for each category of non-compliance, 
from December 2014 to November 2017. Note that Semiannual Assessments 
are published on a lag, meaning that although the statistics below date 
back to 2014, all of the below statistics have been published since the 
2016 period in which my prior Testimony and Privacy Shield were 
finalized.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \80\ 50 U.S.C. Sec. 1881(a)(l)(1).
    \81\ See Swire, supra note 2 at 5-20--5-23.
    \82\ Dir. of Nat'l Intelligence & U.S. Att'y Gen., Semiannual 
Assessment of Compliance with Procedures and Guidelines Issued Pursuant 
to Section 702 of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, 26-30 
(Feb. 2016), available at here: https://www.dni.gov/files/documents/
icotr/14th-Joint-Assessment-Feb2016-FINAL-REDACTED.pdf
    \83\ Dir. of Nat'l Intelligence & U.S. Att'y Gen., Semiannual 
Assessment of Compliance with Procedures and Guidelines Issued Pursuant 
to Section 702 of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, 27-31 
(Nov. 2016), found here: https://www.dni.gov/files/documents/icotr/
15th-702Joint-Assessment-Nov2016-FINAL-REDACTED1517.pdf
    \84\ Dir. of Nat'l Intelligence & U.S. Att'y Gen., Semiannual 
Assessment of Compliance with Procedures and Guidelines Issued Pursuant 
to Section 702 of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, 27-31 
(Aug. 2017), found here: https://www.dni.gov/files/icotr/
16th_Joint_Assessment
_Aug_2017_10.16.18.pdf
    \85\ Dir. of Nat'l Intelligence & U.S. Att'y Gen., Semiannual 
Assessment of Compliance with Procedures and Guidelines Issued Pursuant 
to Section 702 of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, 26-30 
(Dec. 2017), found here: https://www.dni.gov/files/icotr/
17th_Joint_Assessment
_Dec_2017_10.16.18.pdf
    \86\ Dir. of Nat'l Intelligence & U.S. Att'y Gen., Semiannual 
Assessment of Compliance with Procedures and Guidelines Issued Pursuant 
to Section 702 of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, 28-32 
(Oct. 2018); found here: https://www.dni.gov/files/icotr/
18th_Joint_Assessment.pdf [hereinafter ``Semiannual Report 18''].
    \87\ Dir. of Nat'l Intelligence & U.S. Att'y Gen., Semiannual 
Assessment of Compliance with Procedures and Guidelines Issued Pursuant 
to Section 702 of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, 30-36 
(Dec. 2019)., found here: https://www.intelligence.gov/assets/
documents/702%20
Documents/declassified/
19th%20Joint%20Assessment%20for%20702%20Dec%202019%20-%20Fi
nal%20for%20release%20(002)OCR.pdf [hereinafter ``Semiannual Report 
19''].

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                Report 14     Report 15     Report 16     Report 17     Report 18     Report 19
    Intelligence Agencies      (Dec. 2014-   (June 2015-   (Dec. 2015-   (June 2016-   (Dec. 2016-   (June 2017
    Compliance Statistics          May          Nov.           May          Nov.           May         to Nov.
                                2015)\82\     2015)\83\     2016)\84\     2016)\85\     2017)\86\     2017)\87\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Overall Non-Compliance Rate         0.35%         0.53%         0.45%         0.88%         0.37%         0.42%
Tasking Non-Compliance Rate         42.3%          58.%         50.8%         35.3%         24.9%         28.7%
Detasking Non-Compliance            24.3%         21.5%         13.7%          5.9%          7.5%          7.3%
 Rate
Notification Non-Compliance          8.7%          5.2%          6.4%          6.8%         11.2%         22.1%
 Rate
Documentation Non-Compliance         4.9%          2.2%         12.9%          7.5%           14%         23.6%
 Rate
Minimization Non-Compliance         14.8%          9.9%         14.3%         42.5%         39.1%         17.3%
 Rate
Miscellaneous/Other Non-             4.9%          2.5%            2%          1.9%          0.9%          0.7%
 Compliance Rate
Overcollection Non-           Not reported  Not reported  Not reported         0.1%   Not reported         0.3%
 Compliance Rate
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Overall, AG/ODNI concluded in each Semiannual Assessment that ``the 
agencies have continued to implement [targeting and minimization] 
procedures and follow [applicable] guidelines in a manner that reflects 
a focused and concerted effort by agency personnel to comply with the 
requirements of Section 702.''\88\ Only two incidents of intentional 
non-compliance were identified in the six Semiannual Assessments that 
have been published since my 2016 Testimony, each of which was 
remedied.\89\ The Semiannual Assessments enable transparency into the 
conduct of foreign intelligence surveillance that, to the best of my 
knowledge, remains unique among leading nations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \88\ This conclusion is from the October 2018 Semiannual 
Assessment, but is representative of the conclusion of prior Semiannual 
Assessments. See, e.g., Semiannual Report 18, supra note 86 at 48, 
(``[T]he agencies continued to implement the procedures and follow the 
guidelines in a manner that reflects a focused and concerted effort by 
agency personnel to comply with the requirements of Section 702.'').
    \89\ In Semiannual Report 19, there were two issues of intentional 
non-compliance. The first issue involved FBI running batch queries 
under proposed, but unapproved, query procedures. These query 
procedures were eventually approved, but this incident still counted as 
intentional non-compliance. The second issue involved traditional 
intentional non-compliance where an FBI analyst queried his name and 
the name of his co-worker in the FBI database. This analyst was fired, 
and his security clearance was terminated. See Semiannual Report 19, 
supra note 87.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
f. NSA Declassified its Internal Training Manuals for 702 Programs
    Since my 2016 Testimony, NSA has released internal guidance and 
training documents related to Section 702.\90\ The documents show the 
multi-level training NSA provides to personnel on Section 702 
compliance. They include trainings NSA provides to analysts who task 
selectors to be used in Section 702 surveillance, detailing the process 
through which NSA analysts must document their rationale for targeting 
a selector and submit it to an NSA ``Adjudicator'' for review. The 
documents also include trainings provided to Adjudicators on reviewing 
analyst requests to task specific selectors, and the checklists used in 
selector evaluations.\92\ Finally, NSA published a comprehensive 
Section 702 training covering aspects of NSA personnel's compliance 
duties relating to collecting, processing, analysis, retention, and 
dissemination of 702-acquired information, as well as obligations to 
immediately report compliance incidents.\93\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \90\ See Office of the Dir. of Nat'l Intelligence, IC on the 
Record: IC on the Record Guide to Posted Documents, 
IContheRecord.tumblr.com, (Oct. 2020), available at: https://
www.intel.gov/ic-on-the-record/guide-to-posted-documents.
    \91\ See Nat'l Sec. Agency, Updated FAA 702 Targeting Review 
Guidance [Redacted], (May 15, 2017), available at: https://www.dni.gov/
files/icotr/ACLU%2016-CV-8936%20(RMB)%20000911
-001000%20-
%20Doc%2010.%20NSA%E2%80%99s%20702%20Targeting%20Review%20Guidance
.pdf; NSA's Practical Applications Training. See also Nat'l Sec. 
Agency, CRSK1304: FAA Section 702 Practical Applications [Redacted]; 
https://www.dni.gov/files/icotr/ACLU%2016-CV-8936
%20(RMB)%20000911-001000%20-
%20Doc%2011.%20NSA%E2%80%99s%20702%20Practical%2
0Applications%20Training.pdf.
    \92\ See Nat'l Sec. Agency, FAA702 Adjudicator Training [Redacted], 
available at: https://www
.dni.gov/files/icotr/ACLU%2016-CV-8936%20(RMB)%20000911-001000%20-
%20Doc%2012.%20
NSA%E2%80%99s%20702%20Training%20for%20NSA%20Adjudicators.pdf; Nat'l 
Sec. Agency, FAA 702 Adjudication Checklist [Redacted], available at: 
https://www.dni.gov/files/icotr/
ACLU%2016-CV-8936%20(RMB)%20001001-001049%20-
%20Doc%2013.%20NSA%E2%80%99s%
20702%20Adjudication%20Checklist.pdf
    \93\ See Nat'l Sec. Agency, OVSC1203: FISA Amendments Act Section 
702 [Redacted], available at: https://www.dni.gov/files/icotr/
ACLU%2016-CV-8936%20(RMB)%20001001-001049%20-%2
0Doc%2017.%20NSA%E2%80%99s%20Training%20on%20FISA%20Amendments20Act%20Se
c
tion%20702.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    As one comment on possible reforms that may address EU legal 
concerns, the U.S. government might consider codifying training 
requirements and other aspects of compliance. Such codification might 
be done through either statutory or non-statutory means, to address 
European legal concerns that Section 702 and other safeguards be 
``required by law.''
3. Updates to the Former 215 Program.
    In my 2016 Testimony, I discussed ``[p]erhaps the most dramatic 
change in U.S. surveillance law'' since the Snowden disclosures: The 
termination of a bulk telephone record collection program that had been 
operated under Section 215 of the USA PATRIOT Act, and its replacement 
with a targeted call records program.\94\ This change began when 
President Obama's Review Group, in which I participated, reviewed the 
215 program and found it ``not essential to preventing attacks.'' \95\ 
The USA FREEDOM Act was passed soon thereafter, and prohibited bulk 
collection under Section 215, as well as under pen register, trap-and-
trace, and national security letter authorities. NSA terminated the 
bulk phone records program on November 29, 2015.\96\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \94\ Swire, supra note 2 at 3-16--3-18.
    \95\ See id.
    \96\ See Office of the Dir. of Nat'l Int., ODNI Announces 
Transition to a New Telephone Metadata Program, (Nov. 27, 2015), 
available at: https://www.dni.gov/index.php/newsroom/press-releases/
press-releases-2015/item/1292-odni-announces-transition-to-new-
telephone-meta
data-program.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The USA FREEDOM Act thus introduced a targeted telephone call 
detail records program (the ``CDR Program'') that operated as I 
described in my 2016 Testimony.\97\ The government had to identify a 
specific selector that is reasonably suspected of being associated with 
terrorism (such as a phone number), and obtain a FISC order requiring a 
communications provider to produce records associated with that 
selector. The government could only obtain records that were no more 
than two ``hops'' from the identified selector.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \97\ See Swire, supra note 2 at 3-16--3-18.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Since my 2016 Testimony, the NSA voluntarily terminated the CDR 
Program due to compliance and data-integrity issues it did not believe 
could be resolved. This section briefly describes the significant 
events relating to the CDR Program: (a) the NSA's deletion of years' 
worth of CDRs, followed by its decision to terminate the CDR Program, 
and (b) the PCLOB's ensuring report on the CDR Program. These NSA 
actions are another example of the oversight and correction mechanisms 
built into the U.S. legal system governing foreign intelligence.
a. NSA Voluntarily Deleted 3 Years' Worth of USA FREEDOM Act CDRs, then 

        Discontinued the CDR Program Altogether
    The CDR Program was affected by a number of compliance issues that 
resulted in the NSA deciding to delete years' worth of CDR Program 
data, then to discontinue the program. Between 2016 and 2019, the NSA 
provided a number of notices to FISC detailing issues of non-compliance 
and data-integrity issues.\98\ Generally, the non-compliance issues 
included information omitted from FISA applications, providers 
transmitting CDRs on expired orders, and training and access incidents 
involving NSA personnel.\99\ The data-integrity issues generally 
involved the NSA receiving erroneous data from certain telecom 
providers.\100\ NSA notified FISC of these incidents, and deleted CDRs 
associated with these incidents.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \98\ See Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Bd., Report on the 
Government's Use of the Call Detail Records Program Under the USA 
Freedom Act, 20 (Feb. 2020), available at: https://documents.pclob.gov/
prod/Documents/OversightReport/87c7e900-6162-4274-8f3a-d15e3ab9c2e4/PC
LOB%20USA%20Freedom%20Act%20Report%20(Unclassified).pdf [hereinafter 
``PCLOB CDR Report''].
    \99\ See id. at 21.
    \100\ First, a telecom provider pushed ``inaccurate first-hop 
numbers to the NSA,'' which the NSA's system could not detect. 
``Instead, [the system] requested second-hop records using the 
erroneous first-hop response.'' Subsequently, the provider fixed the 
issue and the NSA purged the CDRs containing inaccurate numbers. 
Second, a telecom provider pushed produced a number of CDRs with 
inaccurate data to the NSA. The NSA took immediate action to stop 
receipt of CDRs from the provider. The NSA also found there were four 
FISA applications that relied on the inaccurate information, which it 
quickly reported to the FISC. The NSA then deleted associated CDRs and 
``recalled one disseminated intelligence report generated based on 
inaccurate CDRs.'' Id. at 22.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    In a further incident, when a provider produced inaccurate data, 
NSA searched for ``anomalous data from the other providers,'' and found 
data-accuracy issues distributed across providers.\101\ Further 
discussions by the NSA with another provider confirmed it also provided 
inaccurate data.\102\ Ultimately, NSA determined ``the providers could 
not identify for NSA all the affected records, and NSA had no way to 
independently determine which records contained inaccurate 
information.'' \103\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \101\ Id. at 23.
    \102\ See id.
    \103\ Id. at 24.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    In response, starting on May 23, 2018, the NSA began deleting all 
CDRs obtained since 2015.\104\ As required under FISA, the NSA also 
notified the PCLOB, Department of Justice (DOJ), and Congressional 
Oversight committees of its decision.\105\ In June 2018, NSA released a 
statement notifying the public that it had deleted all of its call 
records under the CDR program due to ``technical irregularities in some 
data received from telecommunications service providers'' that had 
resulted in the NSA having access to some CDRs that NSA was not 
authorized to receive.\106\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \104\ See Nat'l Sec. Agency, NSA Reports Data Deletion, Release No: 
PA-010-18, (June 18, 2018), available at: https://www.nsa.gov/news-
features/press-room/Article/1618691/nsa-reports-data-deletion/
    \105\ The DOJ subsequently notified FISC. See id.
    \106\ PCLOB CDR Report, supra note 98 at 24.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Shortly after, in early 2019, the NSA allowed its last FISC order 
authorizing CDR collection to expire, thus discontinuing the CDR 
Program under the USA FREEDOM Act.\107\ This decision was based on a 
balancing of ``the program's relative intelligence value, associated 
costs, and compliance and data-integrity concerns.'' \108\ Accordingly, 
the number of CDRs collected by the NSA fell from over 434 million in 
2018 to approximately 4.2 million in 2019.\109\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \107\ As a part of the discontinuation, the NSA deleted remaining 
data collected under the CDR Program, but not data ``that had been used 
in disseminated intelligence reporting or data that was considered 
`mission management related information.' '' PCLOB CDR Report, supra 
note 98 at 24.
    \108\ PCLOB CDR Report, supra note 98 at 24.
    \109\ Semiannual Report 19 supra note 87 at 32.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
b. PCLOB Assessed the USA FREEDOM Act CDR Program
    In February 2020, the PCLOB issued a report reviewing the CDR 
program under the USA Freedom Act (the ``CDR Program Report'').\110\ 
Since the CDR program had been discontinued by the time the PCLOB's 
Report was issued, the PCLOB made no recommendations regarding the Act, 
but did issue five key findings. First, the Board found that the CDR 
program had been constitutional, and second, that the NSA's collection 
of two hops of CDR data on an ongoing basis was statutorily 
authorized.\111\ Third, PCLOB found no agency abuse of the CDR Program 
prior to the NSA's decision to stop CDR collection, and, fourth, no 
evidence that the NSA received statutorily prohibited categories of 
information such as name, address, or financial information related to 
a selector. \112\ Finally, the Board found the NSA did not use its 
authority granted under the USA Freedom Act to attempt to gather 
certain kinds of metadata (the specifics of which remain 
redacted).\113\ More broadly, the PCLOB agreed with the NSA's decision 
to stop CDR collection.\114\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \110\ See generally PCLOB CDR Report, supra note 98.
    \111\ Some of the members of the Board did not join on the 
constitutional analysis provided in the report. See id. at 70-77.
    \112\ See PCLOB CDR Report, supra note 98 at 2.
    \113\ See id.
    \114\ See Privacy and Civil Liberties Bd., Fact Sheet: Report on 
the NSA's Call Detail Records Program Under the USA Freedom Act, 2, 
available at: https://documents.pclob.gov/prod/Documents/
OversightReport/e37f0efb-c85d-4053-b4c1-4159ccbf100f/
CDR%20Fact%20sheet%20FINAL
.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    In March 2020, Congress reauthorized the USA FREEDOM Act, extending 
it through December 2023.\115\ Thus, there is the possibility that NSA 
could revive the CDR Program in the future. However, to do so, the NSA 
would have to obtain FISC orders authorizing the collection of CDRs, 
and the FISC--as it does in other contexts--could impose safeguards on 
CDR collection based on the past experience of the now-discontinued CDR 
Program.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \115\ See USA FREEDOM Reauthorization Act of 2020, H.R. 6172, 116th 
Congress (May 14, 2020), available at: https://www.congress.gov/bill/
116th-congress/house-bill/6172/text
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
4. Updates to Oversight Safeguards.
    My 2016 Testimony describes a comprehensive oversight system for 
foreign intelligence, including Senate and House intelligence 
committees, agency Inspectors General, Privacy and Civil Liberties 
offices in the agencies, and ongoing review by the independent Privacy 
and Civil Liberties Oversight Board.\116\ The structure of these 
oversight safeguards remains unchanged since 2016. This section briefly 
discusses updates occurring within the existing oversight framework: 
(a) PCLOB issuing its PPD-28 report, and (b) activities by Inspectors 
General.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \116\ See Swire, supra note 2 at 3-26--3-34.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
a. PCLOB Issued its PPD-28 Report
    On October 16, 2018, PCLOB published its report on Presidential 
Policy Directive 28 (PPD-28) (the ``PPD-28 Report'').\117\ To produce 
the Report, PCLOB reviewed the PPD-28 targeting procedures of the CIA, 
NSA, and FBI, reviewed ODNI reports on changes to signals intelligence 
under PPD-28,\118\ took comments from the public and NGOs, and held 
classified briefings and discussions with IC elements. PCLOB found PPD-
28 resulted in greater memorialization and/or formalization of privacy 
protections that had inhered in existing practices.\119\ For example, 
prior to PPD-28, NSA had limited its uses of signals intelligence 
collected in bulk to the six permissible purposes listed in PPD-28 
(such as espionage and threats to U.S. armed forces); PPD-28 resulted 
in these limitations being memorialized and codified.\120\ 
Additionally, PPD-28 resulted in extending protections previously 
reserved for U.S. persons to all individuals regardless of nationality. 
For example, NSA and CIA used PPD-28 procedures to refocus on 
protecting ``personal information of all individuals regardless of 
nationality.'' \121\ Similarly, NSA, CIA, and FBI minimization 
procedures now require that ``personal information of non-US persons 
shall only be retained if comparable information of U.S. persons may be 
retained pursuant to'' EO 12333.\122\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \117\ This report was issued on the basis of Section 5 PPD-28, 
which encouraged PCLOB to provide a report on any matters within 
PCLOB's mandate, such as the implementation of Executive Branch 
regulations or policies like PPD-28. See Privacy and Civil Liberties 
Bd., Report to the President on the Implementation of Presidential 
Policy Directive 28: Signals Intelligence Activities, (Oct. 16, 2018), 
available at: https://documents.pclob.gov/prod/Documents/Oversight
Report/16f31ea4-3536-43d6-ba51-b19f99c86589/PPD-28%20Report%20 
(for%20FOIA%20Release
).pdf [hereinafter ``PCLOB PPD-28 Report''].
    \118\ See Office of the Dir. of Nat'l Intelligence, A Status Report 
on the Development and Implementation of Procedures Under Presidential 
Policy Directive 28, (July 2014), available at: https://www.dni.gov/
files/documents/1017/PPD-28_Status_ Report_Oct_2014.pdf; See also 
Office of the Dir. of Nat'l Intelligence, 2016 Progress Report on 
Changes to Signals Intelligence Activities (Jan. 22, 2016), available 
at: https://www.intelligence.gov/index.php/ic-on-the-record-database/
results/12-odni-releases-2016-signals-intelligence-reform-progress-
report.
    \119\ See generally PCLOB PPD-28 Report, supra note 117.
    \120\ See id. at 6.
    \121\ Id. at 6-7.
    \122\ Id. at 7-8.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Based on its review, PCLOB issued four recommendations for PPD-28's 
implementation:

  1)  The National Security Council (NSC) and ODNI should issue 
        criteria for determining which activities or types of data will 
        be subject to PPD-28 requirements;

  2)  IC elements should consider both the mission and privacy 
        implications of applying PPD-28 to multi-sourced systems;

  3)  NSC and ODNI should ensure that any IC elements obtaining first-
        time access to unevaluated signals intelligence update their 
        PPD-28 use, retention and dissemination practices, procedures, 
        and trainings before receiving such data; and

  4)  To the extent consistent with the protection of classified 
        information, IC elements should promptly update their public 
        PPD-28 procedures to reflect any pertinent future changes in 
        practices and policy.\123\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \123\ See id. at 12-18.

    These recommendations were later reviewed by ODNI's Office of Civil 
Liberties, Privacy, and Transparency (CLPT) in an October 2018 report 
on the status of implementation of the PCLOB's PPD-28 Report.\124\ The 
CLPT found that the agencies had already implemented all four of these 
recommendations to the extent possible to maintain national 
security.\125\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \124\ See Office of the Dir. of Nat'l Intelligence, Status of 
Implementation of PPD-28: Response to the PCLOB's Report, (Oct. 2018), 
available at: https://www.dni.gov/files/icotr/Status_of
_PPD_28_Implementation_Response_to_PCLOB_Report_10_16_18.pdf 
[hereinafter ``CLPT PPD-28 Implementation Report''].
    \125\ See id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
b. Inspectors General
    My 2016 Testimony described Federal inspectors general (IGs) as an 
oversight component that provides a well-staffed and significant 
safeguard to ensure that Federal agencies comply with internal 
administrative privacy mandates, including exercising privacy watchdog 
responsibilities\126\. Since my 2016 Testimony, as is widely known, the 
Department of Justice Inspector General issued a report on traditional 
FISA warrants issued in connection with an FBI investigation into a 
U.S. citizen associated with the Trump campaign;\127\ however, this 
report was not related to Section 702 or surveillance targeting non-US 
persons. The IG for the ODNI has continued to issue semiannual reports 
relating to the IC as a whole.\128\ The IGs for surveillance agencies 
have also issued semiannual reports to Congress,\129\ and have 
published on an ongoing basis reports on various investigations 
relating to intelligence agency activities.\130\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \126\ See Swire, supra note 2 at 3-26--3-28.
    \127\ See Office of the Inspector Gen., Review of Four FISA 
Applications and Other Aspects of the FBI's Crossfire Hurricane 
Investigation, US Dept. of Justice, (Dec. 2019), available at https://
www.justice.gov/storage/120919-examination.pdf
    \128\ See Office of the Dir. of Nat'l Intelligence, ICIG Semiannual 
Report, available at: https://www.dni.gov/index.php/who-we-are/
organizations/icig/icig-publications/icig-all-reports
    \129\ See, e.g., Office of the Inspector Gen., Semiannual Report to 
Congress, National Security Agency, (Oct. 1, 2019 to Mar. 31, 2020), 
available at: https://oig.nsa.gov/Portals/71/Reports/SAR/OCT-
MAR%202020%20OIG%20SAR.pdf?ver=2020-09-02-094002-550
    \130\ For a sample of reports from the NSA's Office of Inspector 
General, see, e.g., Office of the Inspector Gen. of the Nat'l Sec. 
Agency, OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL: REPORTS, available at: https://
oig.nsa.gov/reports/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
5. Updates to Transparency Safeguards.
    My 2016 Testimony discussed how, in the wake of the Snowden 
disclosures, the U.S. government focused on increasing transparency 
measures relating to U.S. surveillance, both for companies subject to 
orders and for government agencies that have requested orders.\131\ The 
transparency safeguards I identified in 2016 have remained in place, 
and continue to provide valuable information about how foreign 
intelligence surveillance is conducted by U.S. agencies. This section 
discusses transparency efforts since 2016: (a) additional releases of 
Statistical Transparency Reports, (b) continued corporate transparency 
reporting, (c) the creation of a second, text-searchable IC on the 
Record database, and (d) continued public release of declassified IC 
documents.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \131\ See Swire, supra note 2 at 3-34--3-38.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
a. Additional Releases of Statistical Transparency Reports.
    As discussed in Section 2(e) above, ODNI produces annual 
Statistical Transparency Reports that cover the IC's use of multiple 
types of intelligence.\132\ Above, I discussed the numbers of Section 
702 targets discussed in Statistical Transparency Reports. I note here 
that Statistical Transparency Reports go well beyond Section 702 and 
disclose statistics on the number of governmental requests made under 
other FISA foreign-intelligence authorities, including traditional 
individual FISA warrant authorities for electronic surveillance or 
physical searches, pen-register and trap-and-trace authorities, the 
``business records'' authorities used to obtain Call Detail Records, 
and national security letter authorities. These reports also disclose 
the number of criminal proceedings in which a notice was provided that 
the government intended to use or disclose FISA-acquired information. 
The Statistical Transparency Report is also unique in that it explains 
the development of U.S. surveillance programs, limitations placed on 
programs by FISC, and even instances of the NSA discontinuing 
programs--such as the 2020 Statistical Transparency Report describing 
the NSA's decision to suspend the CDR Program.\133\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \132\ See generally Office of the Dir. of Nat'l Intelligence, 
Statistical Transparency Report: Regarding the use of National Security 
Authorities for Calendar Year 2016, (Apr. 2017) available at: https://
www.dni.gov/files/icotr/ic_transparecy_report_cy2016_5_2_17.pdf; Office 
of the Dir. of Nat'l Intelligence, Statistical Transparency Report: 
Regarding the use of National Security Authorities for Calendar Year 
2017, (Apr. 2018) available at: https://www.dni.gov/files/documents/
icotr/2018-ASTR-CY2017FINAL-for-Release-5.4.18.pdf; Office of the Dir. 
of Nat'l Intelligence, Statistical Transparency Report: Regarding the 
use of National Security Authorities for Calendar Year 2018, (Apr. 
2019) available at: https://www.dni.gov/files/CLPT/documents/
2019_ASTR_for_CY2018.pdf; Office of the Dir. of Nat'l Intelligence, 
Statistical Transparency Report: Regarding the use of National Security 
Authorities for Calendar Year 2019, (Apr. 2020) available at: https://
www.dni.gov/files/CLPT/documents/2020_ASTR_for_CY2019_FINAL.pdf.
    \133\ See 2019 Statistical Transparency Report, supra note 77 at 
29--30.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
b. Continued Corporate Transparency Reporting
    My 2016 Testimony highlighted corporate transparency reporting as 
an important transparency safeguard that arose shortly after the 
Snowden disclosures.\134\ Five leading U.S. technology companies 
(Facebook, Google, LinkedIn, Microsoft, and Yahoo!) filed suit with the 
FISC to gain rights to provide transparency reporting, resulting in a 
DOJ policy change permitting reporting on ranges of governmental 
foreign intelligence requests. The USA FREEDOM Act codified the right 
of companies to issue transparency reports.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \134\ See Swire, supra note 2 at 3-37--3-39.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Since my 2016 Testimony, corporate transparency reporting has 
continued as permitted under the USA Freedom Act, with large companies 
regularly publishing reports on government access requests.\135\ As in 
my 2016 Testimony, this Appendix examines the most recent transparency 
reports of Facebook and Google--the percentages of users whose records 
were accessed in the most recent six-month period is smaller than in 
2016. In total, the number of customer accounts accessed by the U.S. 
government for national security in the most recent time period is no 
more than (1) 118,997 \136\ for Facebook, out of approximately 2.5 
billion\137\ active users per month; and (2) approximately 109,497 
\138\ for Google, out of approximately 1.17 billion\139\ active users 
per month. The charts below, similar to the ones provided in my 2016 
Testimony, reflect the current data above.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \135\ See id.
    \136\ For the time period from July 2019-December 2019, Facebook 
received the following: 0-499 non-content requests (affecting the same 
number of accounts); 0-499 content requests (affecting between 117,000 
and 117,499 accounts); and 0-499 national security letters (affecting 
the same number of accounts). See Facebook, United States Law 
Enforcement Requests for Data, Government Requests Report (2020), 
https://govtrequests.facebook.com/country/United%20
States/2015-H1.
    \137\ See Statista, Number of Monthly Active Facebook Users 
Worldwide as of 4th Quarter 2019 (2020), https://www.statista.com/
statistics/264810/number-of-monthly-active-facebook-users-worldwide/
#::text=With%20over%202.7%20billion%20monthly,the%20biggest%20social%20
net
work%20worldwide.
    \138\ For the time period from January 2019-June 2019, Google 
received the following: 0-499 non-content requests (affecting the same 
number of accounts); 0-499 content requests (affecting between 107,000 
and 107,499 accounts); and 500-999 national security letters (affecting 
between 1000 and 1499 accounts). See Google, Transparency Report--
United States (2020), https://transparencyreport.google.com/user-data/
us-national-security?hl=en.
    \139\ See Craig Smith, 365 Google Search Statistics and Much More 
(2020), Expanded
Ramblings.com (Nov. 30, 2020), http://expandedramblings.com/index.php/
by-the-numbers-a-gigantic-list-of-google-stats-and-facts.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    I make the following observation--these percentages are very, very 
small. Government surveillance requests are far from ``pervasive'' or 
``unlimited,'' as some have suggested.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                          # of Users Accessed in                            Percentage based on
                Facebook                         6 months           Accounts Specified        Users Per Month
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Non-Content Requests   0-499                   0-499               .0000002%
                                     Content Requests   0-499         117,000-117,499                .000047%
            National Security Letters                   0-499                 500-999               .0000004%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                          # of Users Accessed in                            Percentage based on
                 Google                          6 months           Accounts Specified        Users Per Month
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Non-Content Requests   0-499                   0-499               .0000004%
                                     Content Requests   0-499         107,000-107,499                 .00009%
            National Security Letters                   0-499               1000-1499               .0000012%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

c. The Government Has Launched New Transparency Websites
    In 2013, the ODNI created ``IC on the Record,'' a website on which 
ODNI posts declassified documents relating to United States foreign 
intelligence surveillance practices. In doing so, the U.S. government 
became the first government in the world to maintain a running 
repository of declassified documents from its foreign intelligence 
agencies and oversight organs.\140\ Since its appearance in 2013 and my 
2016 Testimony, IC on the Record has accumulated a substantial amount 
of NSA internal records, FISC opinions, and other documents and records 
relating to foreign intelligence surveillance. The IC states that it 
has disclosed hundreds of documents comprising thousands of pages, 
including ``hundreds of documents relating to Section 702.'' \141\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \140\ See Swire, supra note 2 at 3-36--3-37.
    \141\ Office of the Dir. of Nat'l Intelligence, IC on the Record 
Guide to Posted Documents, Intel.Gov, (Oct. 2020), available at: 
https://www.intel.gov/ic-on-the-record/guide-to-posted-documents.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Further, since 2016, the publicly-available online channels through 
which the public has access to intelligence-related documents and court 
decisions has increased. For one, the FISC maintains an online ``Public 
Filings'' database containing a substantial number of its declassified 
opinions and orders, which has added usefulness in being searchable by 
docket number.\142\ Second, ODNI has created ``Intel.gov,'' a new 
repository on an official IC website that creates the capability to 
conduct full text searches on all documents posted on IC on the 
Record.\143\ These resources make the transparency offered by the U.S. 
government significantly more actionable for researchers, civil-rights 
organizations, and civil society in monitoring how foreign intelligence 
surveillance is being conducted.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \142\ See U.S. Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Ct., Public 
Filings--US Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court, available at: 
https://www.fisc.uscourts.gov/public-filings. [hereinafter ``FISC 
Public Filings Website''].
    \143\ See Intel.gov, IC on the Record Database, available at: 
https://www.intel.gov/ic-on-the-record/guide-to-posted-documents 
[hereinafter ``Intel.gov''].
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
6. Updates to Executive Safeguards
a. Presidential Policy Directive 28 (PPD-28)
    My 2016 Testimony discussed Presidential Policy Directive 28 (PPD-
28) as a significant new safeguard that creates an extensive system of 
privacy protection for signals intelligence activities involving non-US 
persons.\144\ Since my prior testimony, PPD-28 has remained unchanged 
in substance. As discussed above, PPD-28 has resulted in intelligence 
agencies codifying PPD-28 protections into targeting and minimization 
procedures governing their conduct of signals intelligence. More 
significantly, PPD-28 remained in place during the transition between 
the Obama and Trump administrations.\145\ The Biden administration is 
reportedly expected to continue or increase current protections under 
PPD-28.\146\ This demonstrates significant continuity among U.S. 
presidential administrations to maintain the United States' commitment 
to PPD-28 and the protections it offers to non-US persons.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \144\ See Swire, supra note 2 at 3-41--3-46.
    \145\ See clpt ppd-28 Implementation Report, supra note 124 at 4.
    \146\ See Kristen Bryan et. al., Election 2020: Looking Forward to 
What a Biden Presidency May Mean for Data Privacy and Data Privacy 
Litigation, National Law Review, (Nov. 12, 2020), available at: https:/
/www.natlawreview.com/article/election-2020-looking-forward-to-what-
biden
-presidency-may-mean-data-privacy-and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
b. Privacy Shield
    My 2016 Testimony discussed Privacy Shield as a significant 
safeguard for the protection of data relating to EU citizens, since it 
introduced commitments from the U.S. government to provide remedies to 
EU citizens, to act promptly and effectively to address EU data 
protection concerns, and to subject compliance to an ongoing review 
process.\147\ After the Schrems II judgment, Secretary of Commerce Ross 
stated that the Department of Commerce would ``continue to administer 
the Privacy Shield program,'' and that the ECJ decision ``does not 
relieve participating organizations of their Privacy Shield 
obligations.'' \148\ This indicated the U.S. government continues to 
require Privacy Shield organizations to apply Privacy Shield 
protections to data received under the Shield until the data is 
deleted.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \147\ See Swire, supra note 2 at 3-49.
    \148\ U.S. Dept. of Commerce, US Secretary of Commerce Wilbur Ross 
Statement on Schrems II Ruling and the Importance of EU-US Data Flows 
(July 16, 2020), available at https://www.commerce.gov/news/press-
releases/2020/07/us-secretary-commerce-wilbur-ross-statement-schrems-
ii-ruling-and.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
7. Updates to Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court (FISC) Testimony.
    Chapter 5 of my 2016 Testimony contained an evaluation of the 
significant number of FISC opinions that had been declassified 
following the Snowden disclosures, in a number of cases at the FISC's 
own order. My assessment reached four primary conclusions:

  1.  The newly declassified FISC materials support the conclusion that 
        the FISC today provides independent and effective oversight 
        over U.S. government surveillance.

  2.  The FISC monitors compliance with its orders and has enforced 
        with significant sanctions in cases of noncompliance.

  3.  In recent years, both the FISC on its own initiative and new 
        legislation have greatly increased transparency.

  4.  The FISC now receives and will continue to benefit from briefing 
        by parties other than the Department of Justice in important 
        cases.

    Since my prior testimony, additional FISC opinions have been 
published, but I am not aware of any reason to alter these conclusions. 
This section briefly describes updates that have occurred since 2016 
and support the above conclusions: (a) FISC decisions continue to be 
declassified and published; (b) the FISC and FISA Court of Review have 
issued further decisions in ACLU litigation discussed in my prior 
Testimony; and (c) FISC transparency statistics continue to show FISC 
exercising considerable oversight over government surveillance 
applications.
a. New and Significant FISC Opinions Continue to be Declassified and 
        Published
    The transparency in regard to FISC opinions that I discussed in my 
2016 Testimony has continued to the present. Opinions have been 
published under the USA FREEDOM Act's requirement to publish every FISC 
``decision, order, or opinion'' that contains ``a significant 
construction or interpretation of any provision of law'' to the 
greatest practicable extent.\149\ Others have been published in 
connection with litigation pursued by civil-rights organizations.\150\ 
On the whole, a considerable quantity of FISC opinions have been 
published and can be accessed through IC on the Record,\151\ the FISC's 
own ``Public Filings'' website,\152\ and in text-searchable form on the 
Intel.gov repository.\153\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \149\ 50 U.S.C. Sec. 1872.
    \150\ See, e.g., IC on the record, Release of the FISC Opinion 
Approving the 2016 Section 702 Certifications and Other Related 
Documents (May 11, 2017), available at: https://icontherecord
.tumblr.com/post/160561655023/release-of-the-fisc-opinion-approving-
the-2016 (listing ``Other FISA Section 702 and Related Documents'' 
produced in response to Freedom of Information Act litigation).
    \151\ See IC on the record, available at: https://
icontherecord.tumblr.com/.
    \152\ See FISC Public Filings Website., supra note 142.
    \153\ See Intel.gov, supra note 143.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
b. Updates to ACLU Litigation Discussed in Prior Testimony
    My 2016 Testimony discussed litigation brought by the ACLU 
following the Snowden disclosures in which the ACLU requested that FISC 
publish its opinions authorizing the bulk telephone records program 
under Section 215.\154\ The FISC found that the ACLU had Article III 
standing to seek publication of FISC opinions, and ordered the 
publication of certain Section 215 program authorizations. Since my 
2016 Testimony, the FISA Court of Review confirmed that the ACLU and 
similar public-interest organizations have Article III standing to 
bring petitions for publication of FISC opinions.\155\ However, in a 
subsequent decision, FISCR held that the FISC does not have subject-
matter jurisdiction to hear challenges by public-interest organizations 
to the withholding of redacted, nonpublic materials in those 
opinions.\156\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \154\ See Swire, supra note 2 at 5-39--5-41.
    \155\ See In Re: Certification of Questions of Law to the Foreign 
Intelligence Surveillance Court of Review, No. 18-01 (F.I.S.C. Mar. 16, 
2018), https://www.fisc.uscourts.gov/sites/default/files/FISCR%2018-
01%20Opinion%20March%2016%202018.pdf.
    \156\ See In Re Op.s & Orders by the FISC Addressing Bulk 
Collection of Data Under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, No. 
18-02 (F.I.S.A. Ct. Rev. Mar. 24, 2020), available at: https://
www.fisc.uscourts.gov/sites/default/files/
FISCR%2020%2001%20Opinion%20200424.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
c. FISC Transparency Statistics
    My 2016 Testimony assessed a description of the FISC, in the wake 
of the Snowden disclosures that FISC acted as a ``rubber stamp'' for 
government surveillance requests.\157\ The FISC itself had disputed 
this characterization, stating in a letter to the Senate that ``24.4 
percent of matters submitted ultimately involved substantive changes to 
the information provided by the government or to the authorities 
granted as a result of Court inquiry or action.'' \158\ The USA FREEDOM 
Act permitted the Administrative Office of U.S. Courts to issue new 
statistics on FISC practice that--unlike prior DOJ reporting--did not 
merely state the number of applications that FISC had denied in full, 
but rather accounted for all applications that FISC procedures 
significantly modified, denied in part, or denied in full.\159\ This 
reporting enabled a more complete view of the extent to which FISC 
subjects government surveillance requests to scrutiny resulting in 
changes or denial. My 2016 Testimony evaluated the first of these new 
FISC reports and found that ``the FISC either rejected or modified just 
over 17 percent of all surveillance applications it received in the 
latter half of 2015.'' \160\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \157\ Swire, supra note 2 at 5-9--5-18.
    \158\ Letter dated July 29, 2013 from Reggie B. Walton, FISC Chief 
Judge, to Patrick J. Leahy, Chairman of the U.S. Senate Judiciary 
Committee 2, http://www.fisc.uscourts.gov/sites/default/files/
Correspondence%20Grassley-1.pdf.
    \159\ See Swire, supra note 2 at 5-43--5-48.
    \160\ Id. at 5-14--5-17.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Since 2016, the FISC has continued to publish its statistics on the 
number of applications and certifications for surveillance it modifies 
or denies.\161\ These reports show the FISC modifying or denying a 
greater percentage of governmental surveillance requests than it did 
during my prior review. The following table summarizes the FISC 
statistics for each year since my 2016 Testimony:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \161\ See U.S. Courts, Director's Report on Foreign Intelligence 
Surveillance Courts' Activities, available at https://www.uscourts.gov/
statistics-reports/analysis-reports/directors-report-foreign
-intelligence-surveillance-courts.
    \162\ Admin. Office of U.S. Cts., Report of the Director of the 
Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts on Activities of the Foreign 
Intelligence Surveillance Courts for 2017, 4, (Apr. 25, 2018), 
available at https://www.uscourts.gov/sites/default/files/
ao_foreign_int_surveillance_court_an
nual_report_2017.pdf
    \163\ Admin. Office of U.S. Cts., Report of the Director of the 
Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts on Activities of the Foreign 
Intelligence Surveillance Courts for 2018, 4, (Apr. 25, 2019), 
available at https://www.uscourts.gov/ sites/default/files/fisc_annual_ 
report_2018_0.pdf.
    \164\ Admin. Office of U.S. Cts., Report of the Director of the 
Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts on Activities of the Foreign 
Intelligence Surveillance Courts for 2019, 4, (Apr. 27, 2020), 
available at https://www.uscourts.gov/sites/default/files/
fisc_annual_report_2019_0.pdf.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                    Sum of
                                     Total  Number     Total  Number of    Total  Number of      Applications      Total Number  of     Percentage  of
              Year                   Applications        Applications        Applications      Modified,  Denied   Applications  and     Applications
                                       Modified         Denied in  Part         Denied           in  Part, and      Certifications        Modified or
                                                                                                    Denied                              Denied by  FISC
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2017\162\                                       391                  50                  26                 467               1,614                 29%
2018\163\                                       261                  42                  30                 333               1,318                 25%
2019\164\                                       234                  38                  20                 292               1,010                 29%
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

8. Updates to Surveillance-Related Standing Cases
    My 2016 Testimony briefly discussed the role that Article III 
standing may play in attempts to challenge surveillance programs before 
U.S. courts.\165\ This section briefly describes the state of select 
U.S. cases seeking court review of surveillance programs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \165\ See Swire, supra note 2 at 5-9--5-10.

  a.  Civil Challenges--The two primary attempts to file a civil 
        challenge to Section 702 programs are both actively appealing 
        dismissals on standing grounds.\166\ In each case, the 
        plaintiffs were granted discovery to prove they had standing 
        and proffered either documents or experts as evidence. However, 
        both suits were ultimately dismissed on standing ground because 
        plaintiffs could not show a significant probability, or show 
        evidence the government would authenticate, that the 
        plaintiffs' communications had been affected by 702 programs or 
        their predecessors. My understanding is that both proceedings 
        are currently on appeal to a Federal circuit court.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \166\ See Jewel v. NSA, No. C 08-04373, 2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 
217140 (N.D. Cal. 2019); Wikimedia Found. v. NSA/Central Sec. Serv., 
427 F. Supp. 3d 582 (D. Md. 2019).

  b.  Challenges in Criminal Cases--In at least two criminal cases, 
        defendants have asserted challenges to the constitutionality 
        and lawfulness of Section 702 programs when 702-obtained 
        evidence was proffered against them.\167\ The challenges have 
        been heard and adjudicated, in each instance with Section 702 
        programs being found lawful. In each instance, the defendant 
        was a U.S. person whose communications had been incidentally 
        collected via 702 programs. In both cases, the lawfulness of 
        incidentally acquiring communications of U.S. persons via 
        Section 702 programs was affirmed on at the appellate 
        level.\168\ In one case, following this appellate finding, the 
        case was remanded to the district court to evaluate whether any 
        querying of databases containing such incidentally-acquired 
        Section 702 information by the government was 
        constitutional.\169\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \167\ See U.S. v. Hasbajrami, 945 F.3d 641 (2d Cir. 2018); U.S. v. 
Mohamud, 843 F.3d 420 (9th Cir. 2016).
    \168\ See U.S. v. Hasbajrami, 945 F.3d 641 (2d Cir. 2018); U.S. v. 
Mohamud, 843 F.3d 420 (9th Cir. 2016).
    \169\ See .S. v. Hasbajrami, 945 F.3d 641 (2d Cir. 2018) (finding 
that incidental acquisition of U.S. person communications through 
Section 702 is lawful, but remanding to district court to determine if 
querying of databases containing 702-acquired information by the 
government occurred and if so, whether it violated the defendant's 
constitutional rights).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 ______
                                 
        Annex to Swire Testimony: Acronyms used in this Appendix

 
        ACLU                   American Civil Liberties Union
        AG                     Attorney General
        DNI                    U.S. Director of National Intelligence
        DOD                    U.S. Department of Defense
        DOJ                    U.S. Department of Justice
        DOJ NSD                U.S. Department of Justice, National
                                Security Division EU European Union
        FBI                    U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation
        FISA                   Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act
        FISC                   U.S. Foreign Intelligence Surveillance
                                Court
        FISCR                  U.S. Foreign Intelligence Surveillance
                                Court of Review
        FTC                    U.S. Federal Trade Commission
        IC                     U.S. Intelligence Community
        IG                     Inspector General
        ISP                    Internet Service Provider
        MCT                    Multiple Communication Transactions
        NSA                    U.S. National Security Agency
        NSD                    National Security Division
        NSL                    National Security Letters
        OCR                    U.S. Department of Health and Human
                                Services Office for Civil Rights
        ODNI                   U.S. Office of the Director of National
                                Intelligence
        OIG                    U.S. Office of the Inspector General
        PCLOB                  Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight
                                Board
        PPD                    Presidential Policy Directive
        SIGINT                 Signals Intelligence
        US                     United States of America
        USA FREEDOM            Uniting and Strengthening America by
                                Fulfilling Rights and Ending
                                Eavesdropping, Dragnet-collection and
                                Online Monitoring
        USA PATRIOT            Uniting and Strengthening America by
                                Providing Appropriate Tools Required to
                                Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism
 


    The Chairman. Well, thank you very much. And yes, indeed, 
if there was ever a bipartisan committee, it is this Senate 
committee. So now we turn to Neil Richards. And Professor 
Richards is appearing remotely. Do we have a good connection? 
Alright, good, can you hear us?
    Mr. Richards. I can. Can you hear me, sir?
    The Chairman. You bet. You are recognized for 5 minutes to 
summarize your testimony, more or less----

              STATEMENT OF PROF. NEIL M. RICHARDS,

         KOCH DISTINGUISHED PROFESSOR IN LAW; DIRECTOR,

       CORDELL INSTITUTE FOR POLICY IN MEDICINE AND LAW,

               WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY IN ST. LOUIS

    Mr. Richards. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Wicker, 
Ranking Member--hopefully less, sir. Chairman Wicker, Ranking 
Member Cantwell and other distinguished members of this 
committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify at this 
important hearing. My name is Neil Richards and I am the Koch 
Distinguished Professor of Law at Washington University in St. 
Louis where I also co-Direct the Cordele Institute for Policy, 
Medicine and Law. I am here as an expert on privacy, like my 
friend Professor Swire. I was also an independent expert 
witness in Schrems II, in my case for the Data Protection 
Commissioner of Ireland.
    The opinions I offer today, however, are my own, and I 
would like to make three points in my opening remarks. First, 
the Schrems litigation is a creature of distrust. This distrust 
comes from the inadequacy of existing Federal privacy 
safeguards, rights, and remedies, and also, as other panelists 
have mentioned, from Edward Snowden's 2013 surveillance 
revelations that led Mr. Schrems to sue in the first place. Two 
dimensions of the Schrems II holding our paramount importance 
to Congress as it confronts privacy reform.
    One is that any successor to the Privacy Shield will 
require Congress to enact surveillance reform that limits the 
scope of surveillance and provides meaningful and binding 
individual remedies to challenge illegality. The other 
consequence of Schrems II is a particular relevance to this 
committee. U.S. privacy laws are not yet sufficient to meet EU 
laws cross border requirements of adequacy, which is to say 
that U.S. privacy laws do not yet offer protections of personal 
data held by companies that are essentially equivalent to those 
in the EU.
    This matters because adequacy will let EU data flow from 
Ireland to the U.S. as easily as it can currently flow from 
Germany to France. Adequacy would make second best mechanisms 
like the model contractual clause as the Privacy Shield 
arrangements unnecessary. This leads us to my second main point 
regarding this committee's bipartisan work on consumer privacy 
reform, which I believe can solve some of the challenges for 
data flows and privacy law raised by Schrems II.
    Comprehensive consumer privacy reform from this committee, 
coupled with Federal surveillance reform, could result not just 
in another second best international data transfer agreement, 
but in an adequacy determination by the European Commission. 
Under the GDPR, adequacy requires essential equivalence to EU 
protections, including the rule of law and respect for privacy 
as a fundamental right in commercial and surveillance contexts. 
The ECJ in Schrems II specified three factors as most important 
here. First, appropriate safeguards. Second, enforceable 
rights. And third, effective legal remedies. These principles 
are necessary for cross-border transfers and for adequacy. They 
would also, I believe, be a good roadmap for American consumer 
privacy reform. This committee has already generated draft 
bills in a good way toward meeting some of these requirements. 
For example, the draft bill introduced by Senator Cantwell 
would provide a variety of rights similar to and potentially 
essentially equivalent to those in the GDPR.
    Critically, the Cantwell bill also includes a private right 
of action for consumers who are injured by unlawful data 
processing, something that the challenge of Schrems II seems to 
require. I am also a fan of Senator Schatz's Data Care Act, and 
the approach of Title II of Chairman Wicker's SAFE DATA Act, 
which has provisions for algorithmic bias detection, data 
broker registration, filter bubble transparency, and critically 
abusive trade practices stemming from manipulated interface 
design. Third, and finally, there is a better way forward than 
our status quo of distrust.
    In a series of published papers, Professor Woodrow Hartzog 
and I have sought to identify the factors that could get us 
beyond the dangerous fictions of notice and choice, or even of 
control-based privacy regulation, and use privacy law to create 
value for companies as well as protecting consumers. Our trust 
research indicates that companies who seek trust must be 
honest, they must be discreet, they must be protective, and 
they must be loyal. And that where the market provides 
insufficient incentives, the law can help. In a draft article, 
we have also articulated a duty of loyalty to privacy law, a 
duty that actually bears some similarities to Title II of the 
Wicker bill.
    In sum, the Schrems litigation is a creature of distrust. 
It has created problems for American law and commerce, but it 
has also created a great opportunity. That opportunity lies 
before this committee, the chance to regain American leadership 
in global privacy and data protection by passing a 
comprehensive law that provides appropriate safeguards, 
enforceable rights, and effective legal remedies for consumers.
    Passing such a law would not just safeguard the ability to 
share personal data across the Atlantic. If done right, it will 
build trust between the United States and our European trading 
partners and between American companies and the European and 
American customers.
    The way forward requires us to recognize that strong, 
clear, trust building rules aren't hostile to business 
interests. That we need to preserve effective consumer remedies 
and State level regulatory innovation. And that we should 
seriously consider some kind of duty of loyalty.
    In that direction, I believe, lies not just consumer 
protection, but international cooperation and economic 
prosperity. Thank you.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Richards follows:]

   Prepared Statement of Prof. Neil M. Richards, Koch Distinguished 
Professor in Law, Director, Cordell Institute for Policy in Medicine & 
                Law, Washington University in St. Louis
    Chairman Wicker, Ranking Member Cantwell, and other distinguished 
Members of this Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify at 
this important hearing examining the future of trans-Atlantic data 
flows and of American privacy law in light of the European Court of 
Justice's invalidation of the Privacy Shield arrangement in the Schrems 
2 case which.\1\ My name is Neil Richards, and I am the Koch 
Distinguished Professor in Law at Washington University in St. Louis, 
where I also co-Direct the Cordell Institute for Policy in Medicine and 
Law. I am here as an expert in privacy law, which I have studied, 
taught, written about, and practiced for the past two decades. I was 
also asked by the Data Protection Commissioner of Ireland to serve as 
one of her independent experts in U.S. law in Schrems 2, alongside Mr. 
Andrew Serwin, a distinguished privacy lawyer now with the firm of DLA 
Piper. The opinions I offer today are my own. They are not necessarily 
those of either the Irish Data Protection Commissioner or Washington 
University in St. Louis.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ C-311/18, Data Protection Commissioner v. Facebook Ireland 
Ltd., http://curia.europa.eu/juris/document/document.jsf?docid= 
228677&mode=req&pageIndex=1&dir=&occ=rst=1&
text=&doclang=EN&cid=10716034. (hereinafter ``Schrems 2'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    As someone who has followed technology and privacy policy closely 
since the 1990s, I am deeply encouraged that Congress--and particularly 
this Committee under Senator Wicker's and Senator Cantwell's 
leadership--is taking seriously the urgent need for comprehensive, 
reasonable, but consumer protective information privacy legislation. 
This is something that in my opinion is long overdue--Congress came 
close to passing such a law in 1974, but failed to reach an agreement 
on private sector data because of concerns about its effect on 
industry.\2\ As we know all too well, this is a pattern that has 
repeated itself all too often over the past fifty years. It is my 
fervent hope that this time will be different, and that Congress will 
not just pass a comprehensive privacy bill, but one that gets it right, 
that provides clear but substantive rules for companies, and which 
provides adequate protections and effective remedies for consumers. A 
law that meets these features will not just protect consumers--it will 
be good for business as well, by helping enable transatlantic data 
flows and building the consumer trust that is essential for long-term 
sustainable economic prosperity for all.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \2\ E.g., Sarah E. Igo, The Known Citizen: A History of Privacy in 
Modern American 257-61 (2018); Lawrence Cappello, None of Your Damn 
Business: Privacy in the United States from the Gilded Age to the 
Digital Age 200-03 (2019).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    In awareness of the limited time I have for these opening remarks, 
I would like to offer three observations. First, I will explain what I 
understand the judgment in Schrems 2 to require, with particular 
emphasis on factors within the jurisdiction of this Committee. Second, 
I will illustrate some ways in which this Committee's work can solve 
some of the challenges for data flows and privacy law that the Schrems 
2 judgment raises or illustrates. Third, I will argue that this 
Committee should pass a strong privacy law that builds the consumer 
trust that is so essential to sustainable and profitable commerce.
I. The Schrems 2 Case
    Privacy is a human right recognized around the world and here in 
the United States. Protections for privacy run throughout our 
Constitution, and the ``reasonable expectation of privacy'' test is at 
the core of our Fourth Amendment protections against unreasonable 
searches and seizures.\3\ As the Supreme Court recognized in the 
Carpenter decision two years ago, these constitutional privacy 
protections extend to significant categories of human information that 
are held on our behalf by private companies.\4\ In 1974, when it passed 
the Privacy Act, Congress recognized that ``privacy is a personal and 
fundamental right.'' \5\ Nevertheless, to date, both Congress and the 
state legislatures have insufficiently protected information privacy 
against private actors, particularly in the digital context.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \3\ E.g., Griswold v. Connecticut, 381 U.S. 479 (1965); Katz v. 
United States, 389 U.S. 347 (1967); Riley v. California, 573 U.S. 373 
(2014).
    \4\ Carpenter v. United States, 585 U.S. ___; 138 S. Ct. 2206 
(2018).
    \5\ Privacy Act of 1974, Sec. 2(a)(4), P.L. 95-579.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Under European law, both privacy and data protection are 
fundamental rights expressly protected by the European Charter of 
Fundamental Rights and Freedoms.\6\ In the European Union (EU), the 
government is required to protect fundamental rights (including privacy 
rights) against both public and private actors. Consequently, privacy 
and data protection are specifically protected in the EU by its General 
Data Protection Regulation or ``GDPR.'' \7\ As relevant to this 
hearing, the GDPR does two things. First, it regularizes and limits the 
collection and processing of personal data by private actors, including 
companies.\8\ Second, it places limitations on the ability of EU 
personal data to leave the EU, such as when U.S. tech companies use EU 
data to fulfill search or GPS requests, store it in the cloud, or use 
it for HR purposes.\9\ In an ideal case, the GDPR allows the personal 
data of Europeans to flow to a country whose privacy law has been 
deemed ``adequate.'' \10\ But American privacy law has never been 
deemed ``adequate,'' in large part because America lacks a 
comprehensive, protective privacy law that allows people to enforce 
their privacy rights against companies as well as the government.\11\ 
As a result, the legality of the trans-Atlantic data trade has been 
based upon a set of mechanisms that are second-best--including the 
model contracts and international executive agreements like the Safe 
Harbor and Privacy Shield at issue in the Schrems litigation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \6\ Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union: 2010 O.J. 
(C83) 389. Proclaimed by the Commission, 7 December 2000. Proclamation 
and text at 2000 O.J. (C364) 1.
    \7\ See Commission Regulation 2016/679, 2016 O.J. (L 119) 1 (EU) 
(providing the new GDPR).
    \8\ Chris Jay Hoofnagle, Bart van der Sloot & Frederik Zuiderveen 
Borgesius, The European Union general data protection regulation: what 
it is and what it means, 28:1 Info. & Comms. Tech. L. 65 (2019).
    \9\ See Paul M. Schwartz & Karl-Niklaus Peifer, Transatlantic Data 
Privacy, 106 Geo. L. J. 115, 130-31 (2017).
    \10\ GDPR Art. 45.
    \11\ Paul M. Schwartz & Karl-Niklaus Peifer, Transatlantic Data 
Privacy, 106 Geo. L. J. 115, 158-61 (2017).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The Schrems litigation is a creature of the costly distrust 
produced by inadequate Federal privacy laws, protections, and remedies 
against both government and corporate surveillance. The first Schrems 
decision of 2015 invalidated the Safe Harbor Agreement based upon the 
revelations about U.S. Surveillance practices by Edward Snowden.\12\ 
This was replaced by the Privacy Shield Agreement, the legality of 
which was a key issue in the Schrems 2 litigation. This past July, the 
European Court of Justice ruled in Schrems 2, striking down the Privacy 
Shield and casting doubt on the mechanism of the standard contractual 
clauses as a means of transfer to the US.\13\ Because the United States 
has not been deemed to have an ``adequate'' level of privacy 
protections, EU Data Protection regulators are now able to suspend 
transfers of EU personal data to the United States. Indeed, the Irish 
Data Protection Commissioner has already initiated such proceedings 
against Facebook, the American company at issue in the Schrems 
litigation.\14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \12\ 3 Case C-362/14, Schrems v. Data Prot. Comm'r, 2015 E.C.R. 
650,191 (Oct. 6, 2015).
    \13\ See Schrems 2 at pp. 61-62.
    \14\ See Shane Phelan & Adrian Weckler, Facebook in legal battle 
over order from regulator to halt data transfer to United States, The 
Irish Independent, Sept. 12, 2020, https://www.independent.ie/business/
technology/facebook-in-legal-battle-over-order-from-regulator-to-halt-
data-transfer-to-united-states-39524581.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Two dimensions of the Schrems 2 holding are of paramount importance 
to Congress as it confronts privacy reform. The first is that any 
successor to the Privacy Shield would seem to require Congress to enact 
surveillance reform. The European Courts are particularly concerned 
that EU citizens whose data is exported to the United States lack 
meaningful remedies to challenge the legality of the ways that their 
data may be processed, and the ways in which it may be accessed 
(particularly in bulk) by the U.S. Intelligence Community.\15\ In 
particular, the European Court of Justice found in Schrems 2 that the 
principal defect of the Privacy Shield mechanism was that it failed to 
offer a binding legal remedy for violations of EU fundamental data 
protection rights. The Privacy Shield did not allow EU citizens to sue 
the U.S. government for violations of their rights, but it did create 
an ``Ombudsperson'' mechanism within the U.S. State Department, who 
could act as a kind of complaints desk and investigator. As the 
European Court of Justice put it, however, ``there is nothing [  ] to 
indicate that [the Privacy Shield] ombudsperson has the power to adopt 
decisions that are binding on those intelligence services and does not 
mention any legal safeguards that would accompany that political 
commitment on which data subjects could rely. . . . Therefore, the 
ombudsperson mechanism to which the Privacy Shield Decision refers does 
not provide any cause of action before a body which offers the persons 
whose data is transferred to the United States guarantees essentially 
equivalent to those required by Article 47 of the Charter.'' \16\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \15\ Schrems 2,  65, 187, 194.
    \16\ Schrems 2  196-97.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The second dimension of the Schrems 2 decision of relevance to 
Congress--and of particular relevance to this Committee--is that U.S. 
privacy laws are not yet ``adequate,'' which is to say that they do not 
yet offer protections for personal data held by companies that are 
``essentially equivalent'' to those in the EU. This matters because 
``adequacy'' would let the U.S. be treated essentially as a part of 
Europe for purposes of EU data flow restrictions. If the U.S. were to 
be deemed to have an ``adequate'' level of data protection, then 
``second-best'' mechanisms like the model contractual clauses and 
Privacy Shield arrangements would become unnecessary. While I 
understand the kinds of surveillance reforms necessitated by the first 
dimension of the Schrems 2 judgment to be more appropriately part of 
the Senate Judiciary Committee's and Senate Intelligence Committee's 
jurisdictions, the consumer privacy reforms suggested by the second 
dimension of the judgment are not merely part of this Committee's 
jurisdiction, but would seem to me to fall squarely within the 
bipartisan comprehensive consumer privacy reform project that the 
Committee has already embarked upon. It is to that issue that I will 
now turn.
II. Surveillance and Consumer Privacy Reform After Schrems 2
    As Congress considers comprehensive consumer privacy reform, that 
reform effort will inevitably intersect with the cross-border data 
transfer issue raised by the Schrems litigation and the invalidation of 
both the Safe Harbor and Privacy Shield arrangements. To solve the 
problem of trans-Atlantic data transfers and the GDPR, there are 
essentially three options. First, the United States could do nothing. 
This would devastate the lucrative and commerce-enhancing trans-
Atlantic data trade and result in so-called ``data localization,'' 
which would require U.S. companies to build expensive data centers in 
Europe, and process EU citizens' data there at a significant 
competitive disadvantage to their international competitors. The second 
option would be for the Executive Branch to negotiate a third, more-
protective version of Safe Harbor/Privacy Shield, which would 
undoubtedly result in uncertainty as an inevitable ``Schrems 3'' 
challenge rumbled slowly through the Irish and European Courts once 
again. While it is impossible to perfectly anticipate the results of 
such a lawsuit, I can say with confidence that without substantial 
surveillance and consumer privacy reform, the litigation would be 
likely to end up being invalidated on similar grounds to the Safe 
Harbor Agreement struck down in Schrems 1 and the Privacy Shield 
Agreement struck down in Schrems 2.
    But there is a third way. Comprehensive consumer privacy reform 
from this Committee, coupled with Federal surveillance reform could 
result not just in another second-best international data transfer 
agreement, but in an adequacy determination by the European Commission. 
In fact, the Schrems 2 judgment points the way towards such an outcome. 
As the European Court of Justice explained in that case, Article 45(1) 
of the GDPR permits the European Commission to determine that the U.S. 
could have an ``adequate level of protection.'' The European Court of 
Justice explains further that ``the term `adequate level of protection' 
must, as confirmed by recital 104 of [the GDPR], be understood as 
requiring the third country in fact to ensure, by reason of its 
domestic law or its international commitments, a level of protection of 
fundamental rights and freedoms that is essentially equivalent to that 
guaranteed within the European Union by virtue of the regulation, read 
in the light of the Charter.'' \17\ Article 45 of the GDPR explains 
this requirement in further detail by explaining that adequacy requires 
an inquiry into
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \17\ Schrems 2  94 (citing GDPR Art. 45, GDPR Recital 104).

        (a) the rule of law, respect for human rights and fundamental 
        freedoms, relevant legislation, both general and sectoral, 
        including concerning public security, defence, national 
        security and criminal law and the access of public authorities 
        to personal data, as well as the implementation of such 
        legislation, data protection rules, professional rules and 
        security measures, including rules for the onward transfer of 
        personal data to another third country or international 
        organisation which are complied with in that country or 
        international organisation, case-law, as well as effective and 
        enforceable data subject rights and effective administrative 
        and judicial redress for the data subjects whose personal data 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
        are being transferred;

        (b) the existence and effective functioning of one or more 
        independent supervisory authorities in the third country or to 
        which an international organisation is subject, with 
        responsibility for ensuring and enforcing compliance with the 
        data protection rules, including adequate enforcement powers, 
        for assisting and advising the data subjects in exercising 
        their rights and for cooperation with the supervisory 
        authorities of the Member States; and

        (c) the international commitments the third country or 
        international organisation concerned has entered into, or other 
        obligations arising from legally binding conventions or 
        instruments as well as from its participation in multilateral 
        or regional systems, in particular in relation to the 
        protection of personal data.\18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \18\ GDPR Art. 45(2).

    It is a tremendous (and to my mind disappointing) irony that, even 
though the Privacy Shield was struck down as insufficient, the privacy 
protections against commercial processing offered to EU citizens whose 
data was protected by Privacy Shield was substantially greater than 
that extended to American citizens under U.S. law.
    Yet even if the United States does not seek or achieve an adequacy 
determination from the European Commission, the level of privacy 
protection given to personal data in the United States is still 
relevant to the sustainability of both the model contract mechanism for 
data transfers and any future, hypothetical ``Privacy Shield 2.'' This 
is because, as the Schrems 2 judgment explains, transfers under the 
second-best option of model contracts or Privacy Shield-type agreements 
will still require an inquiry into something very much like the 
adequacy of data protection rights available in the United States.\19\ 
The European Court of Justice specified these requirements clearly as 
being (1) appropriate safeguards, (2) enforceable rights, and (3) 
effective legal remedies.\20\ A few additional observations about what 
these requirements would mean in practice is warranted, because I think 
they offer not just a guide to compliance with the GDPR, but also a 
good road map for U.S. privacy reform. As I understand these concepts, 
``appropriate safeguards'' means that personal information will be 
processed in ways that are lawful, appropriate, accurate, secure, and 
not in ways that harm, expose, mislead, misinform, or manipulate 
American consumers.\21\ ``Enforceable rights'' means that consumers can 
make claims against companies regarding how their data is collected, 
used, and disclosed, whether we are talking about rights of access and 
correction, rights to prevent the sale or transfer of data for purposes 
unrelated to the reasons the data was collected in the first place, the 
placement of duties of care, loyalty, and confidentiality on companies, 
or independent oversight of commercial uses of data by the FTC or a new 
independent data protection agency. Finally, ``effective legal 
remedies'' means that where consumers have legal rights, they can 
actually vindicate those rights in court, which means private rights of 
action (whether for damages or injunctive relief) that are not bogged 
down by excessive administrative exhaustion requirements, corporate 
mens rea requirements, broad statutory defenses and safe harbors, or 
the difficulties of navigating standing doctrine.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \19\ Schrems 2  104 (``The assessment required for that purpose in 
the context of such a transfer must, in particular, take into 
consideration both the contractual clauses agreed between the 
controller or processor established in the European Union and the 
recipient of the transfer established in the third country concerned 
and, as regards any access by the public authorities of that third 
country to the personal data transferred, the relevant aspects of the 
legal system of that third country. As regards the latter, the factors 
to be taken into consideration in the context of Article 46 of that 
regulation correspond to those set out, in a non-exhaustive manner, in 
Article 45(2) of that regulation.''); GDPR Art. 46(1) (``In the absence 
of [an adequacy] a decision pursuant to Article 45(3), a controller or 
processor may transfer personal data to a third country or an 
international organisation only if the controller or processor has 
provided appropriate safeguards, and on condition that enforceable data 
subject rights and effective legal remedies for data subjects are 
available.'').
    \20\ Schrems 2  103.
    \21\ See Woodrow Hartzog & Neil Richards, Privacy's Constitutional 
Moment and the Limits of Data Protection, 61 B.C. L. Rev. 1687 (2020) 
(suggesting a range of safeguards for American privacy law).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    This Committee has already generated draft bills that go a good way 
towards meeting some of these requirements. For example, Senate Bill 
2968, The Consumer Online Privacy Rights Act introduced by Sen. 
Cantwell, would provide a variety of rights similar (and potentially 
``essentially equivalent'') to those in the GDPR, like rights of 
access, deletion, and correction, data minimization, data security 
requirements to avoid harming consumers, and algorithmic impact 
assessments.\22\ The bill would also provide a private right of action 
for consumers injured by unlawful data processing, something that the 
challenge of Schrems 2 seems to require.\23\ Senate Bill 2961, The Data 
Care Act introduced by Sen. Schatz, is a bold and farsighted statute 
that would place duties of care, confidentiality and loyalty on 
companies that collect personal data as part of interstate commerce, 
along with an expansion of FTC and state enforcement authority.\24\ I 
am also a fan of some of the provisions of Title II of Senate Bill 
4626, The Safe Data Act introduced by Chairman Wicker, which has 
provisions for algorithmic bias detection, data broker registration, 
filter bubble transparency, and, critically, abusive trade practices 
stemming from manipulative interface design.\25\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \22\ S. 2968, 116th Cong. 1st Sess. (Dec. 3, 2019).
    \23\ See id. tit. III.
    \24\ S. 2961, 116th Cong. 1st Sess (Dec. 2, 2019).
    \25\ S. 4626, 116th Cong. 2d Sess. (Sept. 17, 2020).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    These three factors--appropriate safeguards, enforceable rights, 
and effective legal remedies--are helpful guidelines as this Committee 
goes about its work. They will be important regardless of whether this 
Committee seeks an adequacy determination from the European Commission 
to permit American companies to participate in the trans-Atlantic data 
trade, whether this Committee wants to avoid another Schrems 1 or 
Schrems 2, whether this Committee wants to give American consumers 
equivalent protection under American law to that which EU consumers 
received under the Privacy Shield, or whether this Committee merely 
wants to pass a meaningful consumer privacy protection bill that 
protects American consumers and provides clear but meaningful 
protective guard rails for companies to stay within as part of the 
digital economy.
    With respect to this process going forward, however, let me be 
clear about three essential features that I believe consumer privacy 
reform in the United States must recognize. First, the model of 
``notice and choice'' under which the United States has regulated 
privacy for the past twenty-five years has been an unmitigated 
disaster. Constructive ``notice'' through privacy policies and 
fictitious ``choice'' through limited opt-outs have created both an 
illusion of consumer control and enabled largely unrestricted data 
aggregation.\26\ Our law has not given consumers control; it has 
instead left them largely defenseless and able to be tracked, sorted, 
harmed, discriminated against, marketed to, ideologically polarized, 
and manipulated by private companies. Any meaningful privacy reform 
that is ``consumer protective'' in anything more than name, must place 
substantive limits on the ability of companies to collect, use, and 
sell personal data without meaningful constraint.\27\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \26\ See, e.g., Neil Richards & Woodrow Hartzog, Taking Trust 
Seriously in Privacy Law 19 Stan. Tech. L. Rev. 431 (2016); Neil 
Richards & Woodrow Hartzog, The Pathologies of Digital Consent, 96 
WASH. U. L. REV. 1461, 1463 (2019); Woodrow Hartzog & Neil Richards, 
Privacy's Constitutional Moment and the Limits of Data Protection, 61 
B.C. L. Rev. 1687 (2020).
    \27\ See, e.g., Neil Richards & Woodrow Hartzog, Taking Trust 
Seriously in Privacy Law 19 Stan. Tech. L. Rev. 431 (2016); Neil 
Richards & Woodrow Hartzog, The Pathologies of Digital Consent, 96 
WASH. U. L. REV. 1461, 1463 (2019); Woodrow Hartzog & Neil Richards, 
Privacy's Constitutional Moment and the Limits of Data Protection, 61 
B.C. L. Rev. 1687 (2020).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Second, as the European Court of Justice recognized, private rights 
of action are an essential tool for vindicating legal rights. America's 
next-generation privacy law should not authorize ``gotcha'' private 
claims, or massively aggregated class action suits that risk ruinous 
liability for technical violations. But it should provide what the 
European Court of Justice calls both enforceable rights and effective 
legal remedies, even if such remedies offer in some cases ``merely'' 
effective injunctive relief to prevent violations.
    Third, and finally, I have concerns about bills that are broadly 
pre-emptive of state causes of action. State legislatures and state 
attorneys general have often valiantly protected consumer privacy 
rights in the digital age in the absence of a general Federal privacy 
law.\28\ They have invented new and needed legal protections like data 
breach notification laws, which have spread throughout the country and 
around the world.\29\ The great American jurist Louis Brandeis famously 
referred to state regulatory experimentation as our ``laboratories of 
democracy,'' \30\ and in this time of uncertainty and rapid 
technological change, we should be reluctant to deprive ourselves of 
this opportunity for regulatory innovation. Moreover, where state 
private causes of action like negligence or the privacy torts are 
sometimes the only form of relief available to plaintiffs, I believe 
that it would be unwise for a Federal law to pre-empt state causes of 
action, at least without providing equivalent Federal protections.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \28\ See Danielle K. Citron, The Privacy Policymaking of State 
Attorneys General, 92 Notre Dame L. Rev. 747 (2017).
    \29\ California passed the first data breach notification law in 
2012. See Cal. Civ. Code Sec. Sec. 1798.29, .82, .84 (2012). Today, not 
only do state data breach laws apply across the United States, but 
Federal laws like the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA), the Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), and the Sarbanes-
Oxley Act also contain notification requirements, and even the GDPR has 
incorporated this American legal invention into its comprehensive 
regulatory scheme. See 16 C.F.R. Sec. 682.3(a); 45 C.F.R. 
Sec. Sec. 164.308-.314; 16 C.F.R. Sec. Sec. 314.3-314.4; Alaska Stat. 
Sec. 45.48.010 et seq. (2007); Ariz. Rev. Stat. Sec. 44-7501 (2013); 
Ark. Code Sec. 4-110-101 et seq. (2004); Cal Civ. Code 
Sec. Sec. 1798.29, .82, .84 (2012); Colo. Rev. Stat. Sec. 6-1-716 
(2002); Conn. Gen. Stat. Sec. 36a-701b (2011); Del. Code Tit. 6, 
Sec. 12b-101 et seq. (2011); Fla. Stat. Sec. Sec. 501.171, 282.0041, 
282.318(2)(I) (2010); Ga. Code Sec. Sec. 10-1-910, -911, -912 Sec. 46-
5-214 (West); Haw. Rev. Stat. Sec. 487n-1 et seq.(2008); Idaho Stat. 
Sec. Sec. 28-51-104 To -107 (2008) ; 815 Ill. Comp. Stat. Ann. 
Sec. Sec. 530/1 to 530/25 (2008); Ind. Code Sec. Sec. 4-1-11 et seq., 
24-4.9 et seq.(2014); Iowa Code Sec. Sec. 715c.1, 715c.2 (2015); KAN. 
STAT. Sec. 50-7a01 et. seq. (2008); Ky. Rev. Stat. Ann. 
Sec. Sec. 365.732, 61.931 To 61.934 (West); La. Rev. Stat 
Sec. Sec. 51:3071 et seq. 40:1300.111 To .116 (West); Me. Rev. Stat. 
tit. 10 Sec. 1347 et seq. (2009); Md. Code Com. Law Sec. Sec. 14-3501 
et seq. (2013), Md. State Govt. Code Sec. Sec. 10-1301 To -1308 (2007); 
Mass. Gen. L. Sec. 93h-1 et seq. (2006); Mich. Comp. Law 
Sec. Sec. 445.63,445.72 (2014); Minn. Stat. Sec. Sec. 325e.61, 325e.64 
(2011); Miss. Code Sec. 75-24-29 (2014); Mo. Rev. Stat. Sec. 407.1500 
(2014); Mont. Code Sec. Sec. 2-6-504, 30-14-1701 et seq. (2014); Neb. 
Rev. Stat. Sec. Sec. 87-801, -802, -803, -804, -805, -806,--807 (2014); 
Nev. Rev. Stat. Sec. Sec. 603.A.010 et seq., 242.183 (2013); N.H. Rev. 
Stat. Sec. Sec. 359-C:19, -C:20,--C:21 (2009); N.J. Stat. Ann. 
Sec. 56:8-163 (2012); N.Y. Gen. Bus. L. Sec. 899-Aa, N.Y. State Tech. 
L. 208 (McKinney 2014); N.C. Gen. Stat. Sec. Sec. 75-61, 75-65 (2012); 
N.D. Cent. Code Sec. 51-30-01 et seq (2008).; Ohio Rev. Code 
Sec. Sec. 1347.12, 1349.19, 1349.191, 1349.192 (2004); Okla. Stat. 
Sec. Sec. 74-3113.1, 24-161 to -166 (2014); Or. Rev. Stat. 
Sec. 646a.600 to .628 (2011); 73 Pa. Stat. Sec. 2301 et seq. (2013); 
R.I. Gen. Laws Sec. 11-49.2-1 et seq. (West); S.C. Code Sec. 39-1-90 
(West); Tenn. Code Sec. 47-18-2107 (2014); Tex. Bus. & Com. Code 
Sec. Sec. 521.002, 521.053 (2014), Tex. Ed. Code Sec. 37.007(B)(5) 
(2013); Utah Code Sec. Sec. 13-44-101 et seq. (2010); Vt. Stat. Tit. 9 
Sec. 2430, 2435 (2007); Va. Code Sec. 18.2-186.6, Sec. 32.1-127.1:05 
(2012); Wash. Rev. Code Sec. 19.255.010, 42.56.590 (2013); W.V. Code 
Sec. Sec. 46a-2a-101 et seq. (West); Wis. Stat. Sec. 134.98 (2009); 
Wyo. Stat. Sec. 40-12-501 et. seq. (2007); D.C. Code Sec. 28-3851 et 
seq. (2013); 10 Laws Of Puerto Rico Sec. 4051 et seq.; V.I. Code Tit. 
14, Sec. 2208.
    \30\ New State Ice Co. v. Liebmann, 285 U.S. 262 (1932).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
III. Strong Privacy Safeguards Build Consumer Trust
    The Schrems 2 litigation has certainly created problems for 
American privacy law, but it has also created a pathway towards the 
resolution of those problems, whether through an adequacy 
determination, comprehensive privacy and surveillance reform, or both. 
In the time that I have left, however, I would like to make one final 
point, which is that as this Committee considers privacy reform it give 
serious consideration to imposing some kind of duty of loyalty on data 
processors. In my work with Professor Woodrow Hartzog of Northeastern 
University, I have argued that the solution to the problems of American 
privacy lies in building trust. Today we face a crisis of distrust. The 
Snowden revelations created justifiable distrust when Americans and 
Europeans across the political spectrum realized the scope of largely 
unconstrained surveillance by the Intelligence Community. The Schrems 
litigation is a further offshoot of this distrust by European 
consumers, regulators, and judges. Distrust harms everyone--consumers, 
businesses, and government. It most certainly is bad for business in 
our modern data-driven economy.
    There is a better way than our status quo of distrust. In a series 
of articles, Professor Hartzog and I have sought to identify the 
factors that could get us beyond the dangerous fiction of ``notice and 
choice'' privacy regulation, and use privacy law to create value for 
companies as well as protecting consumers. Our trust theory suggests 
that companies who seek trust must be discreet, honest, protective, and 
loyal.\31\ In a forthcoming article, we give greater detail to a duty 
of loyalty for privacy law based on the risks of opportunism that arise 
when people trust others with their personal information and online 
experiences. Data collectors bound by a duty of loyalty would be 
obligated to act in the best interests of the people exposing their 
data and engaging in online experiences, but only to the extent of 
their exposure. Loyalty would manifest itself primarily as a 
prohibition on designing digital tools and processing data in a way 
that conflicts with a trusting parties' best interests. Our basic claim 
is simple: a duty of loyalty framed in terms of the best interests of 
digital consumers should become a basic element of U.S. data privacy 
law. A duty of loyalty would compel loyal acts and also constrain 
conflicted, self-dealing behavior by companies. It would shift the 
default legal presumptions surrounding a number of common design and 
data processing practices, and it would act as an interpretive guide 
for government actors and data collectors to resolve ambiguities 
inherent in other privacy rules. A duty of loyalty, in effect, would 
enliven almost the entire patchwork of U.S. data privacy laws. And it 
would do it in a way that is consistent with American law and 
traditions, including its commitments to free expression goals and 
other civil liberties. A duty of loyalty along the lines we suggest 
would be a big step for American privacy law, but we think it would be 
a necessary and important one if our digital transformation is to live 
up to its great promises of human wellbeing and flourishing. It would 
also be good for business over the long term. The relationship between 
privacy and trust has been the subject of a lively and creative 
academic literature.\32\ We also note with optimism that the duty of 
loyalty is a topic of debate on this Committee, and we hope that this 
Committee will take the duty of loyalty seriously as an opportunity to 
protect consumers, safeguard responsible, sustainable commerce, and 
allow the United States to once again become a leader in global privacy 
norms.\33\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \31\ Neil Richards & Woodrow Hartzog, Privacy's Trust Gap, 126 Yale 
L.J. 1180, 1183 (2017).
    \32\ Neil Richards & Woodrow Hartzog, Taking Trust Seriously in 
Privacy Law, 19 Stan. Tech. L. Rev. 431 (2016); Neil Richards & Woodrow 
Hartzog, A Duty of Loyalty in Privacy Law, (Sept. 5, 2020) (unpublished 
manuscript), https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract
_id=3642217; Neil Richards & Woodrow Hartzog, The Pathologies of 
Digital Consent, Wash. U. L. Rev. (forthcoming 2019), https://
papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3370433; Neil Richards & 
Woodrow Hartzog, Privacy's Trust Gap, 126 Yale L.J. 1180, 1183 (2017); 
Neil Richards & Woodrow Hartzog, Trusting Big Data Research, 66 DePaul 
L. Rev. 579 (2017); Jack M. Balkin, Information Fiduciaries and the 
First Amendment, 49 U.C. Davis L. Rev. 1183, 1185 (2016); Jack Balkin & 
Jonathan Zittrain, A Grand Bargain to Make Tech Companies Trustworthy, 
The Atl. (Oct. 3, 2016), https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/
archive/2016/10/information-fiduciary/502346/; Jonathan Zittrain, 
Engineering an Election, 127 Harv. L. Rev. F. 335, 340 (2014); Lindsey 
Barrett, Confiding in Con Men: U.S. Privacy Law, the GDPR, and 
Information Fiduciaries, 42 Seattle U. L. Rev. 1057 (2019); Ariel 
Dobkin, Information Fiduciaries in Practice: Data Privacy and User 
Expectations, 33 Berkeley Tech. L.J. 1, 1 (2018); Cameron F. Kerry, Why 
Protecting Privacy Is a Losing Game Today--and How to Change the Game, 
Brookings (July 12, 2018), https://www.brookings.edu/research/why-
protecting-privacy-is-a-losing-game-today-and-how-to-change-the-game/; 
Ian Kerr, The Legal Relationship Between Online Service Providers and 
Users, 35 Can. Bus. L.J. 419 (2001); Daniel Solove, The Digital Person 
(2006); Richard S. Whitt, Old School Goes Online: Exploring Fiduciary 
Obligations of Loyalty and Care in the Digital Platforms Era, 36 Santa 
Clara Computer & High Tech. L.J. 75 (2019); Kiel Brennan-Marquez, 
Fourth Amendment Fiduciaries, 84 Fordham L. Rev. 611, 612 (2015); 
Lauren Scholz, Fiduciary Boilerplate, J. Corp. L. (forthcoming 2020); 
Ari Waldman, Privacy as Trust (2018); Ari Ezra Waldman, Privacy As 
Trust: Sharing Personal Information in A Networked World, 69 U. Miami 
L. Rev. 559, 560 (2015); Ari Ezra Waldman, Privacy, Sharing, and Trust: 
The Facebook Study, 67 Case W. Res. L. Rev. 193 (2016); Christopher W. 
Savage, Managing the Ambient Trust Commons: The Economics of Online 
Consumer Information Privacy, 22 Stan. Tech. L. Rev. 95 (2019).
    \33\ See Neil Richards & Woodrow Hartzog, A Duty of Loyalty for 
Privacy Law, forthcoming 2021, available at https://papers.ssrn.com/
sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3642217.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Conclusion
    Thank you for giving me the opportunity to share my views on the 
consequences of the Schrems 2 decision for privacy reform in the United 
States. In sum, the Schrems litigation is a creature of distrust, and 
while it has created problems for American law and commerce, it has 
also created a great opportunity. That opportunity lies before this 
Committee--the chance to regain American leadership in global privacy 
and data protection by passing a comprehensive law that provides 
appropriate safeguards, enforceable rights, and effective legal 
remedies for consumers. I believe that the way forward can not only 
safeguard the ability to share personal data across the Atlantic, but 
it can do so in a way that builds trust between the United States and 
our European trading partners and between American companies and their 
American and European customers. I believe that there is a way forward, 
but it requires us to recognize that strong, clear, trust-building 
rules are not hostile to business interest, that we need to push past 
the failed system of ``notice and choice,'' that we need to preserve 
effective consumer remedies and state-level regulatory innovation, and 
seriously consider a duty of loyalty. In that direction, I believe, 
lies not just consumer protection, but international cooperation and 
economic prosperity. Thank you.
                               Biography
    Neil Richards is one of the world's leading experts in privacy law, 
information law, and freedom of expression. He writes, teaches, and 
lectures about the regulation of the technologies powered by human 
information that are revolutionizing our society. Professor Richards 
holds the Koch Distinguished Professorship at Washington University 
School of Law, where he co-directs the Cordell Institute for Policy in 
Medicine & Law. He is also an affiliate scholar with the Stanford 
Center for Internet and Society and the Yale Information Society 
Project, a Fellow at the Center for Democracy and Technology, and a 
consultant and expert in privacy cases. Professor Richards serves on 
the board of the Future of Privacy Forum and is a member of the 
American Law Institute. Professor Richards graduated in 1997 with 
graduate degrees in law and history from the University of Virginia, 
and served as a law clerk to both William H. Rehnquist, Chief Justice 
of the United States and Paul V. Niemeyer, United States Court of 
Appeals for the Fourth Circuit.
    Professor Richards is the author of Intellectual Privacy (Oxford 
Press 2015). His many scholarly and popular writings on privacy and 
civil liberties have appeared in wide a variety of media, from the 
Harvard Law Review and the Yale Law Journal to The Guardian, WIRED, and 
Slate. His next book, Why Privacy Matters, will be published by Oxford 
Press in 2021.

    The Chairman. Well, thank you all for excellent testimony. 
I wish the testimony had made me more optimistic about a 
solution, but I think it just confuses me a little more and 
points out the complexity of what is before us. Ms. Espinel, 
your organization submitted an amicus, but in a few words or 
less, were you--whose part were you taking and were you 
disappointed or delighted at the decision?
    Ms. Espinel. We were taking the part of cross-border data 
transfers. So, yes, we were invited to be an amicus along with 
the U.S. Government and the European Commission in the case, 
and we felt it was important to do so for two reasons. The 
first is because our members believe so strongly in privacy 
protection, but the second is because cross-border data 
transfers are not just a software issue or a tech issue, they 
are an issue for every company, no matter the size, no matter 
the sector.
    The Chairman. Were you advocating for the arrangement to be 
upheld?
    Ms. Espinel. Yes, we were advocating for it to be upheld. 
But I do emphasize this point, not so much on behalf of our 
companies, but on the behalf of the customers of our companies, 
because they are--it is companies across the United States that 
rely on cross-border data transfers, and so one of our main 
points to the court was that this would have far reaching 
ramifications for the U.S. and the European economy if it were 
invalidated.
    The Chairman. OK. And that certainly turns out to be the 
case. Mr. Swire, what is significant about January 20 other 
than it is inauguration day? There is no enforcement that kicks 
in beyond that?
    Mr. Swire. Well, there is no enforcement that kicks in. In 
speaking to at least one litigator, I have heard an ominous 
prediction that there may be court orders in Europe on one or 
more major U.S. tech companies by that time, which would be--
that would grab some headlines and attention to the issue if 
court orders like that came out. And there is an opportunity, 
it seems, for Mr. Sullivan and the hard working people who are 
working on those issues currently, in my dream world, to 
imagine trying to get some kind of at least short term interim 
way to have something happen.
    When brand new people come in, it takes a little while to 
get up to speed. I am assuming there is new people coming in. 
And so the very up-to-speed people who are there now have a 
particular opportunity to do something that would then lead to 
easier chances for better some things after that date.
    The Chairman. OK. There is no grace period. There is a 
decision that went into effect immediately.
    Mr. Swire. Right. Correct. Yes.
    The Chairman. Are companies being hauled into court right 
now?
    Mr. Swire. There are numerous--I don't know--I am sorry. 
There are multiple lawsuits in different countries that are 
happening right now, yes.
    The Chairman. OK, but do I take it that your position 
before the decision is that the Privacy Shield agreement should 
be upheld and left in place? Is that your position?
    Mr. Swire. I believe the U.S. had essentially equivalent 
protections and should have been found that way, but the court 
disagreed with that.
    The Chairman. It sure did. And then, Professor Richards, 
you assisted the Irish government in this case, is that right?
    Mr. Richards. That is correct, sir.
    The Chairman. Good. And, what was their position with 
regard to whether this should be upheld or not?
    Mr. Richards. So the position of the Irish Data Protection 
Commissioner--I was an independent expert, as was Professor 
Swire. Under Irish procedure, experts tend to not to be, to use 
the colloquial term, hired guns the way they tend to be in 
American litigation. So we took an oath to give the evidence 
that we would give, say if Facebook or Ireland had retained us. 
But the Irish Data Protection Commissioner took the position 
that there were sufficient doubts about the legitimacy of the 
Privacy Shield, of standard contractual clauses and by 
extension Privacy Shield under European law, that she chose 
after an investigation to seek a referral to the European Court 
of Justice, which made the ultimate determination.
    The Chairman. OK, now Mr. Phillips, was it you that--this 
is all good testimony, by the way. Excellent job on a complex 
issue. Who was talking about the comparative surveillance done 
in Europe? That was you, was it not?
    Mr. Phillips. Senator, I did refer to that.
    The Chairman. OK, and are you saying that basically when it 
comes right down to it, there is not really that much 
difference in the way our intelligence services surveil as 
compared to Europe?
    Mr. Phillips. Senator, there have been a number of studies 
by authoritative lawyers and academics here and in Europe, and 
the bottom line has been that the practices that we engage in 
from a National Security perspective afford just as many, if 
not more, rights to U.S. citizens as rights afforded by 
domestic law in member states of the EU.
    The Chairman. And it seems to me that in resolving this 
matter, that is going to be quite the sticking point.
    Mr. Phillips. I think that is an important consideration, 
absolutely.
    The Chairman. Well, thank you all. And there will be other 
rounds of questions, but this has been a great panel. Senator 
Cantwell.
    Senator Cantwell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Senator Peters, 
do you need--do you have a time constraint? OK, thank you. 
Well, this has been very helpful, I think. And again, 
appreciate the opportunity for the hearing, Mr. Chairman, and 
the witnesses. Mr. Richards, I am struck by this issue of trust 
and distrust because I think there is so much of that in 
practically every issue. But clearly, this one is a thorny one. 
And so we do have to figure out a way to build trust again 
because we are in the digital age and this won't be the last 
issue or the last time we have to address this.
    This is going to continue far into the future. This is the 
era that we live in. And so I appreciate you mentioning our 
efforts here in the Senate and our colleague, Senator Schatz's 
effort on duty of loyalty too because I think that plays into 
trust and the environment. On those factors that you mentioned, 
appropriate safeguards, rights, and enforcement, Mr. Richards, 
I am interested in this larger--so that is a good framework, 
very important framework, and I believe in that framework. I 
think that is the essential aspect of the framework, but over 
here, somewhat out of control of Senator Wicker and I, is 
Government surveillance.
    And I want to hear what Mr. Richards, you say and other 
people say about how we build trust on tackling our most 
important National Security issues. So it is almost like 
industry now is going to be hamstrung. We could fix these 
issues, appropriate safeguards, rights, and enforcement, but 
over here is going to be this large issue about data gathering 
by the Government. And I want us to figure out how we are going 
to move forward. So two examples, Senator Collins and I worked 
with the former Secretary of Homeland Security, Jay Johnson, to 
implement overseas borders. That was hard because you are 
basically doing border security at overseas airports, but no 
one wanted to turn over--you know, the United States was not 
going to get access to European or whatever country we were in 
data, but yet we had to figure out a system where we were both 
going through potential security risks on our own data.
    We figured that out. I know, for example, on some of the 
National Security issues, there is alliance on software. So I 
am pretty sure both in Europe and the United States, there are 
foreign countries working together where on software security. 
So we figured it out. So, Mr. Richards, what do you think those 
security surveillance issues are that really aren't even within 
our Committee jurisdiction, but that we have to figure out how 
to build trust on so that we can resolve this issue so that we 
don't have business in the digital era hung up on digital trade 
because basically our two governments can't figure out how to 
work together.
    And if we can't figure out how to work with the Europeans, 
I got news for you, we got problems. Like, we have got to 
figure out how to work with the Europeans and to figure this 
out. So, Mr. Richards, do you have a thought on that?
    Mr. Richards. I do, Senator. I mean, obviously, this is a 
very difficult problem. The question you have asked me, to 
solve international surveillance cooperation in less than 2 
minutes. But I will give it my best shot. I think some of the 
other speakers, some of the my co-panelists mentioned the 
importance of privacy protections flowing with the data, and 
also the importance, I think Commissioner Phillips mentioned 
this, the importance of countries with shared values having 
shared protections.
    And I think it absolutely should be possible, I realize in 
Washington should is often a very dangerous word, but I think 
that it should be possible for countries, for the EU, the 
United States, the country of my birth, the United Kingdom, 
with shared commitment to the rule of law, shared commitments 
to freedom of expression and privacy and democracy, shared 
strategic and economic interests to cooperate, to extend rights 
of redress to each other's citizens the way that the U.S. 
Government did with the passage of the General Redress Act, 
amending the Privacy Act in 1974 in order to try and save 
Privacy Shield in the spring of 2017. I think extension of 
rights and also cooperation, a coalescing on those privacy 
protections that should travel with the data is.
    Unfortunate, the United States used to be the leader on 
commercial privacy in the early 1970s. It sort of abdicated 
that to Europe. And now that the GDPR, fair information 
practices model that the Europeans have, is the emerging global 
market norm. But if the U.S. cooperated on that as well, I 
think it could go a great deal toward solving the broader 
problems of international cooperation on surveillance.
    Senator Cantwell. I just want to follow up, so--I actually 
think we might be able to achieve that. But then what are we 
going to do about the fact that we don't control--well, Senator 
Wicker and I do have votes on this in the larger body, but we 
don't control these agencies and we certainly don't control 
executive orders and the Presidential Executive Order. All we 
can do is fight it and say that we think it is too broad. So 
how--I am in agreement, we can solve our commercial issues.
    I just don't know if we are still, if the commercial 
industry is still going to get tethered to a national policy by 
an Executive Branch that thinks that we need to go further. 
Personally, I think we need way more transparency on the FISA 
court. Look, these are--we blurred the line in the Patriot Act 
and we just, we have got to do more due diligence here. So, 
thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    The Chairman. Yes. You have outlined a serious stumbling 
block, Senator. I believe Senator Blackburn is next. Are you 
there, Senator?

              STATEMENT OF HON. MARSHA BLACKBURN, 
                  U.S. SENATOR FROM TENNESSEE

    Senator Blackburn. Yes, I am.
    The Chairman. You are recognized for 5 minutes.
    Senator Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you 
to our witnesses for being here and for the opportunity to have 
this hearing today. Privacy Shield, as everyone is fully aware, 
is something that continues to come up. We have got dozens of 
companies in Tennessee that would be impacted. I had pulled a 
list and it is interesting that the wide range of the companies 
that would be impacted, adversely impacted without an 
agreement.
    And everything from a vitamin company to a software 
company, to the Dollywood Foundation, to the Country Music 
Association. So as we talk about trade, as we talk about 
commerce, this is something that is important. I do appreciate 
that Senator Cantwell brought up the issue of trust and 
distrust as we look at this issue. But resolving it and getting 
something in place is vitally important. So, Mr. Sullivan, let 
me come to you first.
    Let's say we are not able to negotiate an agreement. If we 
do not get an agreement, then it seems like that data 
localization may become the new norm. So I want you to speak to 
what would be an adverse outcome?
    Mr. Sullivan. Thank you, Senator, for the question. I guess 
at the outset, let me make clear, you know, I alluded to the 
three successful annual reviews that we have had since 2017, 
where we sat down with the European Commission, the European 
Data Protection authorities, and those are three very 
successful internal reviews. And during that period, since that 
period, before during after those reviews, we have developed 
very constructive, excuse me, and positive working 
relationships with our partners in Europe.
    I do want to note a couple of points. You know, we have 
been talking about the Schrems II litigation since well before 
the third annual review, which took place last October. There 
has been a long-running argument about contingency planning. We 
have been in constant regular contact with the Commission since 
the ruling on July 16. Secretary Ross has reached out to a 
number of high ranking EU officials.
    And, you know, we are working urgently to resolve this 
crisis because Privacy Shield, as you alluded to, is the most 
cost effective and straightforward mechanism for SMEs. And as I 
think I said, nearly 70 percent of the participants in Privacy 
Shield are SMEs. And that is--again, that is across all sorts 
of industries. We are not, again, talking just about digital 
companies or big multinational tech companies. So, you know, 
obviously our first priority is privacy----
    Senator Blackburn. We are not talking about just digital 
companies. I just went through the list. You know, you have got 
Dollywood Foundation and the Country Music Association, CISAC, 
a vitamin company, all of these different Tennessee companies. 
But talk about data localization. And if we don't get 
something, what does that mean and the impact? And then I would 
like to have Ms. Espinel and others weigh in when you finish 
your comment.
    Mr. Sullivan. Of course. So, again, Privacy Shield, I just 
want to be clear, 70 percent are SMEs with fewer than 500 
employees. So we are extremely sensitive to that. And we do 
recognize to your point, you know, in the hopefully unlikely 
situation where we do not arrive at a new arrangement or an 
enhanced Privacy Shield, you know, there are other mechanisms. 
Obviously, the court upheld SCCs. We have worked with our 
inter-agency partners to put out a White Paper to hopefully 
help companies make these case by case assessments.
    On your question, with respect to data localization. That 
is a very significant concern for us. My team has been engaged 
with Europe, but also in countries around the world on this 
issue. And quite frankly, it is not a perfect solve. It is 
exceedingly expensive, even for our large companies that will 
effectively freeze out SMEs in many of the companies that you 
are talking about from access in the EU market.
    And quite frankly, it doesn't work at the end of the day. 
It is simply--beyond the expense factor, trying to keep EU 
personal data in Europe effectively undermines the business 
models of the vast majority of companies that operate this way 
internationally. And so that is not, at the end of the day, a 
viable solution. And if I could----
    Senator Blackburn. Ms. Espinel--I don't want to run out of 
time. Do you have anything to add on that?
    Ms. Espinel. I would say that the organizations that he 
talked about music, country music--the organizations that you 
mentioned, the Country Music Association, the vitamin company, 
they are on that list they were certified under the Privacy 
Shield because they have employees or customers or suppliers in 
Europe. And if they--if data localization goes into place and 
they are not able to access that, that means that they are not 
going to be able to operate effectively either.
    They will be operating at greatly increased cost or they 
won't be able to operate in Europe at all. So the implications 
of data localization are very significant for those 
organizations, but for organizations including many small and 
medium sized businesses across the United States.
    Senator Blackburn. Right. You are changing their business 
model through no fault of their own. Alright, Mr. Phillips, 
anything to add?
    Mr. Phillips. I agree with what both of my co-panelists 
said. I also just want to add, data localization isn't good for 
privacy. It isn't good for data security. It doesn't serve all 
of these other functions in addition to all the cost that it 
imposes on businesses and nonprofit organizations.
    Senator Blackburn. Alright. Mr. Richards?
    Mr. Richards. Sorry, Senator, I was struggling with my mute 
button. Data localization absolutely would be bad, and I think 
the key, as a number of the other witnesses have pointed out, 
is to find some way to harmonize the law. The Europeans, as 
Professor Swire pointed out quite correctly, treat this as a 
matter of constitutional law.
    They believe that just as when they come to the United 
States, they may go to Dollywood on vacation, that they expect 
that their constitutional rights travel with them just the same 
as you or I would expect that our constitutional rights would 
follow us if we went to Europe. And I think because the U.S. is 
in a sense importing the data like a tourist, the Europeans 
expect that their rights are guaranteed.
    And I think this is not--this is a hard problem, but this 
is not an irresolvable problem because of our shared traditions 
and commitments to the rule of law, democracy, and fundamental 
rights.
    Senator Blackburn. Mr. Chairman, thank you. Yield back.
    Senator Thune [presiding]. Senator Blumenthal is up.

             STATEMENT OF HON. RICHARD BLUMENTHAL, 
                 U.S. SENATOR FROM CONNECTICUT

    Senator Blumenthal. Thanks, thanks very much, Senator 
Thune. As you probably know, all of you, this committee has 
spent a good deal of time and effort over the last two years on 
consumer privacy, and I appreciate the leadership of the 
Chairman and Ranking Member. And I am grateful for the 
collaboration of Senator Moran.
    We have worked together on this issue, given California's 
passage of Proposition 24 and the change of Administration. 
This is an area where I think we can make significant 
bipartisan progress in the next Congress, obviously not this 
one. I have been fighting for consumer privacy for many, many 
years as Attorney General before I assumed this office and I 
want to see a strong Federal law enacted. And I believe it is 
possible. This absence of consumer protections is part of the 
reason we have this dispute with the European Union.
    The United States and the EU need and have needed a Privacy 
Shield in the first place because the EU determined that our 
consumer privacy protection in this country are inadequate, as 
a safeguard to personal data. So our lack of consumer 
protection in this country for Americans, private data, also 
harms American businesses that want to operate in Europe.
    All five of you are respected privacy experts and all of 
you called for a Federal consumer privacy law. I thank you for 
your advocacy. And I would like to know more definitely from 
each of you, what role does the United States' lack of consumer 
privacy law play in our negotiations with Europe on cross-
border data transfers? Would having a consumer privacy law for 
the United States help end the cycle of Europe striking down 
data transfer agreements? Maybe begin with you, Mr. Sullivan.
    Mr. Sullivan. Thank you for that question, Senator. Just a 
couple of points, if I could. The adequacy model that has been 
adopted by the EU since about 1995 has to date yielded about 12 
adequacy determinations. There are only 12 jurisdictions in 30 
years that have been acknowledged as adequate by the EU. At the 
same time, there is today no globally accepted standard or 
definition of data privacy and no multilateral agreement on 
these issues. And so I think that is going to continue 
regardless of whether or not there is an omnibus Federal 
privacy law that will remain to be seen.
    But specifically with regard to the situation we are in 
after Schrems II, that ruling focused exclusively on Government 
access to data. And the court did not in any way question 
Privacy Shield's protections with regard to commercial 
collection or uses of data. And while I think that potential 
Federal data privacy legislation would likely be very well 
received by the EU, it will not address the immediate concerns 
that we are dealing with around the National Security issues 
cited by the court in Schrems II. Again, I think, you know, I 
will speak in my position with the International Trade 
Administration.
    We are seeing a proliferation of different national laws 
around the world. Some are taking their inspiration from GDPR. 
That is not a guarantee of adequacy. You have a law in India, 
for example, that sought to emulate GDPR in many ways. Each 
Nation has different cultural traditions, legal traditions, 
backgrounds, priorities. Brazil, similarly. So while I think it 
could help atmospherically and it would probably be very well 
received by our friends in Europe, it is not a guarantee. Thank 
you.
    Senator Blumenthal. Thank you. Mr. Phillips.
    Mr. Phillips. Thank you, Senator, for the question. Let me 
just begin by agreeing, of course, the Schrems II decision is 
about National Security. There is no guarantee that would come 
from a privacy law. And as I said in my written statement in my 
oral testimony, while we don't have a law, I think that our 
privacy enforcement is better than any in the world and more 
impactful than any in the world. That said, I do think a law 
will help.
    I think first, if we are going to do the interoperability 
between countries of data flows, having one law is a better way 
to handle that on an international basis rather than having to 
deal with different jurisdictions. The second, as we have heard 
from all the panelists atmospherically, I think it does help. 
Third, I think there are aspects of a privacy law that you and 
your colleagues, and I thank you for your leadership on this, 
have contemplated that would help a lot of entities.
    For instance, removing limitations on the FTC's 
jurisdiction with respect to common carriers and nonprofits 
will allow those entities to participate in whatever new 
Privacy Shield resolution that we might have because all of a 
sudden their obligations would flow through us. So I do think 
it would be a helpful thing.
    Senator Blumenthal. Thank you. Ms. Espinel.
    Ms. Espinel. Senator Blumenthal, thank you for the 
question. I just want to thank you for your years of leadership 
and dedication on privacy legislation. So I agree. I believe 
that privacy legislation would be a very positive signal to the 
Europeans. I want to emphasize that I think we need Federal 
privacy legislation regardless of the situation that we are in, 
even if the Privacy Shield had not been invalidated.
    We need it for U.S. citizens so that you have strong, 
enforceable privacy protections across the United States, and 
strong obligations on companies. But I also believe that it 
would be a positive signal and would be a benefit to the 
negotiations.
    Last, I just want to say I also believe strongly and would 
encourage this committee to think about the long term issue of 
whether or not we can reach some sort of consensus with at 
least like-minded countries that share our values on 
intelligence gathering practices, because I believe that is 
really critical to finding a long term sustainable solution.
    Senator Blumenthal. Thank you very much.
    Senator Thune. Thank you, Senator Blumenthal.
    Senator Blumenthal. Thank you.

                 STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN THUNE, 
                 U.S. SENATOR FROM SOUTH DAKOTA

    Senator Thune. Commissioner Phillips, after the passage of 
the EU's GDPR, the flow of data between the U.S. and the EU has 
become less stable and subject to much debate. Would a single 
national data privacy law in the United States be beneficial to 
help resolve some of the policy differences between the EU and 
the United States?
    Mr. Phillips. Yes, Senator.
    Senator Thune. And Mr. Sullivan, do you agree with that?
    Mr. Sullivan. Yes, short answer.
    Senator Thune. Short answer----
    Mr. Sullivan. The short answer is yes.
    Senator Thune. OK, good. Mr. Sullivan, what kinds of 
businesses and industries rely upon the Privacy Shield 
framework? And can you talk about the importance of the need to 
transfer data across borders?
    Mr. Sullivan. Of course. So at the time of the ruling on 
July 16, there were nearly 5,400 companies. As I think I have 
said before, nearly 70 percent of those companies participating 
in the Privacy Shield program were small and medium sized 
enterprises with fewer than 500 employees.
    The reason for that was because it was a cost effective 
mechanism, far less administratively burdensome and costly than 
some of the other options, such as standard contractual clauses 
or binding corporate rules, which are largely used by large 
multinationals. The participants in Privacy Shield were again 
from across industry.
    We are talking about small manufacturers, we were talking 
about agricultural producers, other small businesses in a 
variety of industries. So, again, just I know I am a bit 
repetitive, I want to underscore we are not simply talking 
about large multinational tech companies or digital firms. 
Everyone has to transfer data these days across the Internet, 
H.R. records, for maintaining their international networks, 
etc. So it is a broad swath of U.S. industry.
    Senator Thune. Thanks. Commissioner Philips, at a hearing 
earlier this year Chairman Simons stated that the FTC intends 
to make companies fulfill the promises made under Privacy 
Shield. Has the Commission brought enforcement actions with 
regard to Privacy Shield since the time the European Court of 
Justice invalidated the EU-U.S. Privacy Shield?
    Mr. Phillips. Senator, I am a little bit lost on the 
timing, but I believe the answer is yes in the RagingWire case. 
The enforcement that we do on Privacy Shield is under our 
Section 5 deception authority. And what it means in the main is 
if you are making material statements to consumers and you 
violate those statements or, right, you are deceiving those 
consumers, we can go after you. So representations that they 
are making with respect to participation in, or following the 
guidelines of the Privacy Shield, come under that rubric. And 
we are going to continue to enforce against companies that 
don't live up to their commitments.
    Senator Thune. Good. Ms. Espinel, the cross-border transfer 
of data is, as has been pointed out, vital to our economy. As 
the U.S. and the EU work to develop a successor, I should say, 
to the Privacy Shield, are there safeguards the U.S. should be 
giving consideration?
    Ms. Espinel. Thank you. So I think in terms of the 
negotiation on the enhanced Privacy Shield, I don't believe we 
need a total overhaul of the Privacy Shield. I think there are 
some targeted reforms that could address some of the issues 
that were raised specifically by the court. And we are very 
supportive of the work that the Department of Commerce and the 
U.S. Government and the European Commission have been doing 
together. I will say, as I have said before, I think longer 
term, having the United States work with a group of democracies 
that share our values to try to come to a consensus on 
intelligence gathering practices is critical to long-term 
sustainability.
    But in terms of the immediate, urgent, short-term need for 
an enhanced U.S. Privacy Shield, I think there are targeted 
reforms that I believe, obviously Mr. Sullivan could speak 
better to this, but I believe could be addressed in the 
negotiations between the United States and the European Union.
    Senator Thune. Mr. Swire, what effect would the emergence 
of data localization requirements in the EU have on Americans' 
National Security?
    Mr. Swire. On National Security--well, in my testimony I 
refer to previous work that I have done with others on data 
localization, and we hope to have more information about that 
by the end of the month published. For National Security, one 
of the problems would be cybersecurity in the following way. 
When currently, if you are trying to figure out where the bad 
guys are coming from, you have global flows among the defenders 
to make sure that we are getting a good view of where the bad 
guys are coming.
    And if the data cannot come from Europe to the rest of the 
world, then the bad guys know they just have to route it 
through Europe. So we are going to have a discussion at the 
National Academy of Sciences on December 11 specifically about 
the effects on cybersecurity, which affects U.S. National 
Security, affects corporate security. And this is something 
that has not been brought up but is really deserving a lot more 
attention, the effects on cybersecurity.
    Senator Thune. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
    The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Thune. Senator Peters.

                STATEMENT OF HON. GARY PETERS, 
                   U.S. SENATOR FROM MICHIGAN

    Senator Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Swire, I want 
to follow up on the question that Senator Thune asked you, 
because it seems like if eliminating the Privacy Shield, that 
that could possibly result in the global adoption of data 
localization, and I know data localization is the hallmark of 
both Russian and Chinese efforts to centralize and surveil 
valuable streams of data, something we always have to be 
conscious of.
    And I am Ranking Member of Homeland Security Committee here 
in the Senate, and I am certainly committed to protecting 
National Security. And as you were saying, it is something that 
we need to focus on because it has potential to undermine our 
security interests. What specifically should we be doing to 
address this because I am concerned about it?
    Mr. Swire. Well, one thing is to have people in Europe 
understand how serious and how difficult it is to even try to 
build data localization. It is a much more thoroughgoing 
revision of every company's IT system than most people have 
seen. In a 1998 book, we have had multiple chapters about data 
localization even back then with about 40 categories of serious 
effects. And that is linked to in my testimony. And one of the 
examples is the global financial system, which we rely on for 
so many things, including, you know, ongoing secure commerce.
    There are massive data flows of personal data every day 
between countries for regulators to oversee banks, among other 
things. And if there is really data localization, we lose the 
ability to have an integrated global financial system. That all 
by itself could be a hearing that really was worth a lot of 
attention, perhaps in a different committee, but it illustrates 
how thorough the interruption would be if really data 
localization happens from Europe.
    Senator Peters. Right. Well, thank you. My next question 
relates to small business. Ms. Espinel, I would like to ask 
this question of you. And I think, Mr. Sullivan, you were 
dealing with small business. I am going to follow up with a 
question for you related to this too. Because I was walking in 
so I wasn't sure of the question, but your answer is probably 
related to what I want to talk about. But in our increasingly 
connected world, certainly of small businesses like 
manufacturers or retailers as was mentioned, rely on the free 
flow of information.
    In fact, 70 percent of the companies that have certified 
under Privacy Shield are small or medium sized businesses, and 
they simply can't afford to store data overseas, especially 
those small businesses. Of those companies we have identified, 
993 companies in Michigan alone fall into this category. So if 
you could tell me the lack of certainty on international data 
transfers, how is this going to impact small businesses 
immediately? And are there steps that we can take here in 
Congress to address it? How do we mitigate that?
    Ms. Espinel. So I think it is an immediate concern. I mean, 
I think it is worth noting that there are other transfer 
mechanisms that are still in place. So the standard contractual 
clauses were left in place by the court and we are very pleased 
that that is the case. So there are still other transfer 
mechanisms between the United States and Europe. That said, the 
Privacy Shield was the simplest and the least costly of all the 
transfer mechanisms.
    So for small businesses in particular, having the Privacy 
Shield invalidated is a real concern. Standard contractual 
clauses are positive in the sense that they can offer very 
strong privacy commitments to consumers, but they are more 
complicated, they are more resource intensive, so they are more 
difficult by definition and therefore more difficult for small 
businesses. And as you pointed out, small businesses are 70 
percent of the companies that are certified under the Privacy 
Shield.
    And so, we believe that having an enhanced EU-U.S. Privacy 
Shield, having a Privacy Shield agreement back in place that 
small businesses can take advantage of, is of critical 
importance.
    Senator Peters. Thank you for that answer. And Mr. 
Sullivan, I know you are concerned about this as well. And my 
focus--you know, U.S. small businesses are U.S. innovation and 
our innovators that really rely on these data flows, 
particularly when you think of technologies like artificial 
intelligence and the need for data sets to deal with that.
    Talk to me about some of the legal uncertainty for 
international data transfers that are going to impact tech 
startups, particularly in the innovation sectors. If so, how? 
And any other ideas of how we need to deal with that?
    Mr. Sullivan. Certainly, Senator, and thank you for the 
question. We have all talked about how important Privacy Shield 
is for SMEs. We have just heard again about how difficult some 
of the other options SCCs and BCRs, binding corporate rules, 
which can take up to a year and cost upwards of $1 million, 
which is just not an option for small startups, tech or 
otherwise. Which is why, you know, we are working so urgently 
to develop an enhanced Privacy Shield to address the enormous 
uncertainties that now exist and do so quickly because of these 
uncertainties.
    You know, some can avail themselves of SCCs. And although 
there are now some significant questions about their viability, 
we have put out a White Paper to help companies so that they 
can help or they can make these case-by-case assessments that 
have since been required by the Schrems II decision, before 
they send data to the United States. But I think, you know, one 
thing I do want to touch on that others have spoken to, you 
know, we have heard a lot today about the need for perhaps a 
broader discussion among like-minded democracies. I do want to 
emphasize that we have, my team at the International Trade 
Administration in concert with others across the interagency, 
have been engaged with the European Union and other democratic 
countries in a number of different multilateral discussions 
about developing principles and common practices.
    There is an effort underway right now in the OECD to just 
to do just that around, can we arrive at common principles when 
it comes to Government access to data? And in our view, it is 
critical that democracies come together to articulate shared 
principles, primarily not exclusively, to help make clear the 
distinction between what democratic societies do and how we 
respect civil liberties and the rule of law versus what we see 
authoritarian countries do with their growing surveillance 
ambitions to surveil, manipulate, and control their own 
citizens and others around the world with zero regard to 
privacy or civil liberties.
    And so we are really approaching this situation, and again 
SMEs are a priority for us. Many big companies can avail 
themselves of all the different mechanisms that are step one 
with Privacy Shield. The other thing I do want to note with 
Privacy Shield, you know, if we get it back up and running 
soon, what Privacy Shield did was it took the protections and 
redress mechanisms in the context of Government access to data 
and said these apply not only to companies that participate in 
Privacy Shield but to data transfers pursuant to any EU 
approved data transfer mechanism.
    Now, since the ruling, what you have is a situation where 
companies are now stuck with this incredibly onerous burden of 
having to do case-by-case assessments. If we get a Privacy 
Shield framework back in place, that will alleviate all 
companies of all sizes of this onerous burden of having to do 
these case-by-case assessments of countries' National Security 
regimes. 1
    And so I just want to emphasize we have a number of 
different work streams on this beyond just the discrete issue 
of trying to come up with enhancements on Privacy Shield. Thank 
you.
    Senator Peters. Thank you so much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Peters. Ms. Espinel, 
lawsuits are being pursued even as we speak against your member 
companies. Is that correct?
    Ms. Espinel. I am not aware of any lawsuits that are being 
prepared against my member companies, against the enterprise 
software industry that I represent, and it is helpful and we 
were pleased that other transfer mechanisms like the standard 
contractual clauses were left in place by the European Court of 
Justice. And our companies use the standard contractual clauses 
to transfer data. However, as we have discussed, standard 
contractual clauses are much more difficult, much more costly, 
more complicated, resource intensive way of transferring data.
    And therefore, we believe it is urgent that a new Privacy 
Shield be put back in place, both for the benefit of the small 
and medium sized businesses which we have discussed quite a bit 
because of the difficulty and resource intensive nature of the 
standard contractual clauses, but also because even for the 
standard contractual clauses, they will be more stable and more 
solid if there is an enhanced U.S.-EU Privacy Shield agreement.
    The Chairman. Sure. Well, who can enlighten the Committee 
on the degree to which lawsuits are being filed now since there 
is no grace period? Mr. Swire?
    Mr. Swire. I could try a little bit. There has been public 
reports in Ireland of ongoing court proceedings, specifically 
about Facebook. There have been suits filed------
    The Chairman. In Irish courts?
    Mr. Swire. Yes, sir.
    The Chairman. OK.
    Mr. Swire. They are national courts that--currently they 
are not being appealed up to the European wide court system 
yet. There have been public reports about a suit in Germany 
against Amazon. And in talking to one litigator who works 
specifically in that area, I was told there are other suits, 
but I don't know exactly what the details are.
    The Chairman. In those cases, do insurance carriers step 
forward and represent the companies? Defend?
    Mr. Swire. I am not aware of that--is not--a lot of it has 
to do with company conduct and whether the conduct is lawful or 
not. And so large companies would probably defend themselves.
    The Chairman. So well, OK.
    Mr. Swire. But they are facing fines----
    The Chairman. Is it possible for companies to purchase 
insurance coverage to mitigate against these types of actions?
    Mr. Swire. I am aware of many kinds of cybersecurity 
protection that are in place for data breaches. I have not 
heard, and I work a lot in the sector, of any significant 
insurance for fines for privacy violations.
    The Chairman. OK. Senator Schatz, are you there? I think 
Senator Schatz----

                STATEMENT OF HON. BRIAN SCHATZ, 
                    U.S. SENATOR FROM HAWAII

    Senator Schatz. Sorry, Chairman, I am here.
    The Chairman. Yes, sir. You are recognized, sir.
    Senator Schatz. Thank you, Chairman. And thanks to all the 
panelists for a really constructive hearing. I want to start 
with Mr. Richards. You know, the Schrems decision highlights 
why the United States needs a strong data privacy Federal 
statute. And I, of course, believe that we need a duty of 
loyalty and care in Federal law. And I would like you to 
comment on how duties of loyalty and care could complement the 
privacy principles in the Privacy Shield and European privacy 
law without doing violence to our conception of freedom on the 
Internet and the United States?
    Mr. Richards. That is a great question, Senator. If I could 
if just respond to the last question the Chairman asked about 
lawsuits. In my written testimony, I did cite an Irish 
newspaper which is reporting on the Facebook proceeding where 
the data protection commissioner has proceeded to try and 
pursue the Schrems II ruling to stop data flows to from 
Facebook Ireland to Facebook U.S., which it is not the kind of 
risk you can really insure for if the data flows are the 
business itself.
    With respect to your--Senator Schatz, and thank you very 
much for asking, one of the problems with the European 
approach, which incidentally was invented, as I am sure the 
Senator knows, by the U.S. Government in a Department of 
Health, Education and Welfare in 1973--so these GDPR rules that 
we are talking about, as if they are they are foreign law, were 
actually invented by the U.S. Government. They tend to be 
procedural. They tend to say basically, here is how you process 
data. If you want to do it, these are the steps you have got to 
go through. But by and large, they provide a pathway for doing 
so.
    And while data protection rules notice choice, access, 
consent in appropriate circumstances, legitimate interests, 
onward transfer are going to be a necessary part of any robust 
transatlantic or domestic or European framework, what we need 
to have are substantive rules. Senator Schatz, you said in the 
September hearing I believe to Commissioner Kovacic that a duty 
of loyalty isn't that big of a burden because good companies 
already know how good business means being loyal to their 
customers.
    And actually a duty of loyalty that requires putting your 
customer's interests ahead of your own in the short term is 
good for sustainable long term business. And actually, the 
companies that are being loyal when they are not required are 
actually at a competitive disadvantage from the bad guys that 
act in ways that are disloyal, that manipulate their customers 
that mislead them, that send them misinformation, that expose 
them to insecure and unfair data practices.
    Senator Schatz. So I think you make a really important 
point. And I, for the life of me, don't understand the 
resistance to duty of loyalty other than Government relations 
folks feel that their job is to kill everything and lawyers 
feel that anything that may be unclear and needs to be 
elucidated over time or even a statutory obligation that has to 
be elevated to the board level is inherently a risky 
proposition.
    But as you are--as we see, doing nothing is riskier than 
anything for your customers, for the Shield problem, and for 
the prospect of 50 different states enacting 50 different 
statutory frameworks. And so it seems to me that the cleanest 
way to move forward is not just to enact--of course, everyone 
thinks they are the cleanest way to move forward is to enact 
their legislation. But it does seem to me that we have to 
legislate at the conceptual rather than procedural level and 
empower expert agencies to implement the statute through 
rulemaking or even the adjudication of individual cases. So 
talk a little bit more about how notice and choice would be 
insufficient, not just from a consumer protection standpoint, 
but from the standpoint of solving our Shield problem?
    Mr. Richards. Notice and choice are wholly inadequate. They 
basically are--the way they have been implemented in U.S. law, 
with apologies to Commissioner Phillips and his agency, which 
has done fine, fine work with limited tools over the years, but 
the notice and choice framework has been a catastrophic 
failure. The notice that consumers receive is fictitious. Do 
you read privacy policies? Right. There was there was a study 
that it would take 76 days to read all the privacy policy, just 
to read them, of the websites that we encounter in a year------
    Senator Schatz. I just think--I think that everything on 
my--I was just setting up Apple TV and I just agreed to 
everything without reading it like everybody does.
    Mr. Richards. So do I, Senator, and that is precisely the 
point. We have no choice and that is the other fault with 
notice and choice. If we want to participate in the modern 
world, we have to accept these terms and conditions as they are 
given, as they are unread. And often we don't have a choice at 
all. In the pandemic, we may have a choice over our streaming 
service but we don't have a choice over a cable company. We 
don't have a choice over the learning management system or the 
video conferencing system that our children's schools are 
using.
    And so what has happened is that notice and choice have 
been an insufficient check on bad actors in the market and they 
have given consumers resignation. And it dumps the work onto 
consumers, work they cannot possibly hope to achieve, and then 
it performs a masterful trick of making consumers feel bad and 
blame themselves for consenting to privacy policies when they 
didn't actually have a meaningful choice in the first place. 
Sorry, sir.
    Senator Schatz. Thank you. Let me let me just move on to 
one final question for you, Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Sullivan, on the transition. Have you been meeting with the 
Biden, Harris transition team? What is the frequency of those 
meetings? What is the extent of your sharing information as we 
move into the next phase and a transition to a new 
Administration?
    Mr. Sullivan. Thank you, Senator, for that question. As I 
noted at the outset, I oversee the Office of the Digital 
Services Industries. We have three teams. I will tell you that 
each of those teams has met on multiple occasions with transit 
at the agency review team at Commerce. We also prepared a 
transition memo that was intended to bring everyone up to date 
on the state of play with the litigation and the various lines 
of work we have, again, around Privacy Shield, standard 
contractual clauses, our multilateral efforts, and a variety of 
different venues be it OECD, the G20, etc. So my understanding 
is they are being kept fully apprised of our activities and our 
engagement with the Commission, the EDPB, and others and the 
member states in Europe.
    Senator Schatz. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. 
Chairman.
    The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Schatz. Let me ask you, 
Professor Richards, where is there a working duty of loyalty in 
place in law somewhere that we can look to?
    Mr. Richards. That is a great question, Senator. As an 
academic, I feel obligated to plug an article that Dr. Hartzog 
and I have written called ``A Duty of Loyalty for Privacy Law'' 
that explores this in great detail. But to answer the question 
very specifically, duties of loyalty have been a part of the 
Anglo-American common law for centuries. We often see them in 
fiduciary relationships and in corporate law. We tend to see 
that whenever there is vulnerability, whenever one party 
exposes itself to another for combined interests. And frankly, 
Senator, Mr. Chairman, that is precisely what we see with large 
platforms in the Internet economy. We need to have use it to 
expose ourselves to these companies in order to send e-mail, to 
engage in transcontinental videoconferencing like we are doing 
right now, to educate our children, and for so many other ways.
    I think one other place we can look for duties of loyalty, 
I think it is very interesting and very gratifying and 
encouraging to me that all three of the pending bills that were 
introduced, bills that we have talked about in today's hearing, 
your SAFE DATA Act, Senator Schatz's Data Care Act, and Ranking 
Member Cantwell's COPRA, all of them either talk about loyalty, 
or in the case of Title II of your bill, provide loyalty like 
protections against manipulation, against filter bubbles, 
against algorithmic discrimination, and against the 
manipulative--and against experimentation and manipulative use 
of design against consumers.
    The Chairman. And the point that I would make is that when 
we are able to be specific in those instances, then we are 
getting somewhere, but beyond that, it is hard actually to 
define such a duty. I am going to let you expand your answer on 
the record, if you would like. And I may submit some questions 
for the record. This study that you and Dr. Hartzog did, when 
was that published, sir?
    Mr. Richards. It has not yet been published, but it has 
been circulating on and on the website where academic work is. 
A draft has circulated since the summer.
    The Chairman. Can you circulate it to somebody on my staff?
    Mr. Richards. I believe I already have, but I would be 
delighted to do it again, sir.
    The Chairman. I would much appreciate that. Senator Scott.

                 STATEMENT OF HON. RICK SCOTT, 
                   U.S. SENATOR FROM FLORIDA

    Senator Scott. First of all, I want to thank Chairman 
Wicker for hosting this hearing, and I want to thank each of 
you for being here today. My first priority is to ensure the 
privacy and security of American families. Also making sure we 
have an environment where businesses can thrive. Right now, our 
Nation is facing threats from all across the world. We have 
adversaries like the Communist Party of China that continue to 
steal our data and technology, and force companies in China to 
turn over any user data their government wants.
    Chinese backed companies like Huawei will hand over any 
sensitive data, including medical records, financial 
information, and social media accounts if they gain access to 
our markets. My colleague, Senator Cotton, introduced a bill 
which I support that would permanently prohibit the U.S. from 
sharing intelligence with countries that give Huawei access to 
their 5G networks. We have to do everything we can to provide 
Americans their information--protect Americans' information and 
our National Security. Mr. Phillips, what enforcement or what 
enforcement measures and oversight should be in place to ensure 
companies operate in the United States with access to personal 
and personal identifying information, disclose to the user 
where the company is housing the data?
    Mr. Phillips. Thank you, Senator Scott, for your question. 
To my mind, it is a question about materiality, what matters to 
those consumers. And I do think it is very well within 
Congress's purview to consider that question and to legislate 
upon it. I think increasingly, as we live in a globalized 
world, these kinds of questions where the data are, are 
important questions. But it is important to note that China has 
data localization.
    And it is very important, as we have all been discussing, 
for the liberal democracies of the world that have a more open 
approach to Internet governance to find a path forward 
together.
    Senator Scott. Thank you. When entering international 
privacy agreements, how do we ensure the U.S. places Americans' 
privacy interests first? Mr. Phillips.
    Mr. Phillips. Thank you, Senator. We don't, at the FTC, 
negotiate the privacy agreements. What we do is provide, in my 
view, a very important backstop. And that is when companies 
make commitments that they are participating in those 
agreements, make commitments about what they do as part of 
those agreements where they violate the law, where they make 
statements that aren't true that matter to consumers, we can 
bring enforcement actions against them. And that is what we 
have done for years.
    Senator Scott. So what do you think about requiring online 
retailers to disclose more information like where data is 
housed or where products are produced?
    Mr. Phillips. I would have to give a little bit more 
thought to whether and to what extent that is material to 
consumers. I do think over time that is an increasing concern 
and it is definitely something within Congress's purview.
    Senator Scott. I can't imagine why we don't know where 
Amazon and Wal-Mart don't tell U.S. where products are made, 
where services are provided, or where apps are created. So what 
do you think is the biggest safeguard that should be put in 
place to protect our data better?
    Mr. Phillips. Well, I think we have all been talking about 
for purposes of Americans and their privacy, a privacy bill. 
The difficulty we are facing today is in part or in large part 
to do with the European courts visa VR practices, not on the 
consumer side, but on the National Security side. And I do 
think as we have these discussions moving forward, as I said in 
my testimony, we do want to understand and defend American 
values, and we don't want our security not to be an important 
part of that conversation.
    Mr. Phillips. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    The Chairman. Thank you very much. This has been a very, 
very informative hearing, and some very talented and 
knowledgeable witnesses. I thank all five of you. And at this 
point we will close the hearing. Oh, Senator Rosen.

                STATEMENT OF HON. JACKY ROSEN, 
                    U.S. SENATOR FROM NEVADA

    Senator Rosen. Senator Rosen. Yes, I am here and I know I 
am always the last one, but I am waiting. I am here.
    The Chairman. Well, why don't we recognize you for 5 
minutes then?
    Senator Rosen. Well, thank you, my friend. I appreciate it. 
And I appreciate this hearing. It has been really informative. 
And I want to talk about the importance of small business, of 
course. So Nevada is home to more than a quarter of a million 
small businesses. Small businesses are the driving force that 
powers my state's economic engine. But unfortunately, this 
pandemic has dealt business owners unprecedented challenges and 
obstacles. We need to be doing all we can to ensure that our 
small and medium-sized businesses can survive this pandemic and 
receive the resources and support they need to compete both 
domestically and internationally. Nevada based companies that 
conduct business outside the U.S. depend on agreed upon 
frameworks that ensure they are adhering to their international 
client's home country rules and regulations, including those 
related to data protection and security.
    So actually, there are over 30 companies in Nevada that 
depended on the now invalidated Privacy Shield. The framework, 
of course, that allows for the transferring, processing, and 
storing of personal data from the EU to the U.S. Businesses 
such as game development firm Play Studios, and software 
company Action Verb that are headquartered right in Las Vegas. 
So unfortunately, it is quite small size and medium-sized 
businesses that have had the most to lose if the EU and the 
U.S. aren't able to reach a new agreement.
    Larger businesses with large compliance departments, they 
will really have the upper hand, and it gives them a big 
competitive edge over the smaller firms, not just in Nevada but 
across the country. So to both Ms. Espinel and Mr. Sullivan, 
before the adoption of Privacy Shield, there was a different 
mechanism that enabled personal data transfers from the U.S. to 
the EU until it was also invalidated by European court in 2015. 
With that in mind, as we look to a new Administration and 
future talks with our EU partners, what issues do we as 
policymakers need to address to deal with the underlying 
intelligence gathering concerns that have plagued these 
frameworks so we just don't end up in the same place over and 
over again?
    Mr. Sullivan. Thank you, Senator, for your question. Just 
to reiterate, maybe add a few more details to your point on 
SMEs, I want to make sure everyone has a sense of just how cost 
effective Privacy Shield is. And as you noted, its 
predecessor's framework, Safe Harbor was. Right now, the fees 
or the fees at least up until Schrems II for participation in 
the program, are based on your annual revenue.
    So if you were a company with annual revenue of up to $5 
million, your certification and participation in Privacy 
Shield, the fee you paid was $250. If you were $5 million to 
$25 million, it was $650. I won't run you through the whole 
list, but if you are over $5 billion in annual revenue, what 
you paid for Privacy Shield was $3,250. It was again by far the 
most cost effective approach for transatlantic data transfer 
mechanisms. And that is why--it is just another element as to 
why we think it is so critical, particularly for SMEs.
    The other thing I want to make folks aware of, our Privacy 
Shield team and our other teams, our global data policy team, 
engage in regular roadshows and they meet--they have a 
particular remit and focus on SMEs to make sure they 
understand, you know, if they do want to go global, if they do 
want to do business in Europe, how do they do that? What are 
the issues? What are the options? Another thing, again, at the 
risk of being redundant, because we don't have a global 
standard on data protection privacy, because countries do take 
different approaches, we also have another mechanism in place. 
You know, we have come up, because it is going to take a while 
for a global standard, we have got to bridge our differences.
    And so we had Privacy Shield with Europe. We had Safe 
Harbor before that, as you just noted. We also in APAC have 
something called the Cross-Border Privacy Rules System. And 
again, that is another way that we can bridge our differences 
with some common baseline standards around privacy. And so, 
again, we do a lot on the APAC's CBPR system to make sure that 
companies, particularly SMEs, understand that that is an option 
that is available to them.
    All of this is to promote interoperability so that 
companies are facing, again, increasingly fragmented and 
unaligned regulatory regimes around the world on these issues, 
and SMEs in particular, cannot pay the costs on this. And so we 
have got to come up with these structures until we get to a 
time where there is a single global standard.
    Without sounding like I am criticizing GDPR, I do think it 
is important to note, when it went into effect in May 2018, 
what happened was you saw the big multinationals actually 
expand their market share and thousands of U.S. SMEs basically 
made the determination that it was either too expensive to 
comply with GDPR, or that the potential fines were simply too 
onerous and they withdrew from the market.
    And so we spent a lot of time and effort to make sure that 
we are ensuring market access for SMEs. Hopefully, I answered 
your question. If not, I am happy to follow up if I missed 
something. Thank you.
    Senator Rosen. No, that is fine. I know my time has 
expired, but----
    Ms. Espinel. Chairman Wicker, would I be able to respond 
Senator Rosen's question?
    The Chairman. Yes, please.
    Senator Rosen. Thank you.
    Ms. Espinel. Thank you. Senator Rosen, first, I want to 
note that not only is Nevada home to many small businesses, but 
as you know, in the jobs report, the latest jobs report we put 
out, Nevada was the number one highest growth rate for software 
jobs in the country. So I want to congratulate you for that and 
the work that you are doing on STEM training is going to create 
jobs across the country. In terms of the issue at hand, there 
are three things that I think we need to do. The first is we 
need to negotiate an enhanced U.S.-EU privacy agreement. We 
have talked a lot about that. I commend Jim Sullivan for the 
work that he and his team are doing.
    Two, long term we need to reach a consensus with a group of 
democracies that share our values on intelligence gathering. 
And I think that will be a real challenge and an opportunity 
for U.S. leadership as we move forward. And third, we need to 
rebuild our foreign alliances and we need to make trust the 
basis of those.
    And I think that both underpins and is overarching the 
first two. That those three elements, the urgent need for 
enhanced U.S.-EU Privacy Shield, a long-term solution on 
appropriate safeguards on intelligence norms, and then 
rebuilding our foreign alliances with the trust underlying them 
that they warrant, are critical to moving forward.
    Senator Rosen. Thank you very much for both of those 
answers. I look forward to working with you on finding the best 
ways that we can support all those tech jobs that keep growing 
in Nevada and, of course, all the small and medium sized 
businesses that do want to expand across the Nation. Thank you, 
Mr. Chairman, for indulging my time.
    The Chairman. Thank you. Thank you, Senator Rosen. You and 
I need to vote, and we will now close this hearing. The hearing 
record will remain open for two weeks. During this time, 
Senators are asked to submit any questions for the record. Upon 
receipt, the witnesses are requested to submit their written 
answers to the Committee as soon as possible. Thank you. We 
conclude the hearing, and we very much appreciate your 
participation.
    [Whereupon, at 11:51 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

                            A P P E N D I X

                             American Civil Liberties Union
                                   Washington, DC, December 9, 2020

Hon. Roger Wicker,
Chairman,
Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation,
U.S. Senate,
Washington, DC.

Hon. Maria Cantwell,
Ranking Member,
Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation,
U.S. Senate,
Washington, DC.

RE: The Invalidation of the EU-US Privacy Shield and the Future of 
            Transatlantic Data Flows

Dear Chairman Wicker, Ranking Member Cantwell, and Members of the 
            Committee,

    On behalf of the American Civil Liberties Union (``ACLU''),\1\ we 
submit this letter for the record in connection with the Senate 
Commerce Committee's hearing, ``The Invalidation of the E.U.-U.S. 
Privacy Shield and the Future of Transatlantic Data Flows.'' We write 
to address the legal reforms that must be made to permit the free flow 
of data from the E.U. to the U.S., in the wake of the Schrems II 
decision by the Court of Justice of the European Union (``CJEU''), and 
subsequent guidance by the European Data Protection Board. These 
changes are essential to ensure that small and large businesses alike 
will not continue to suffer financial consequences through no fault of 
their own.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ For nearly 100 years, the ACLU has been our nation's guardian 
of liberty, working in courts, legislatures, and communities to defend 
and preserve the individual rights and liberties that the Constitution 
and the laws of the United States guarantee everyone in this country. 
The ACLU takes up the toughest civil liberties cases and issues to 
defend all people from government abuse and overreach. With 
approximately two million members, activists, and supporters, the ACLU 
is a nationwide organization that fights tirelessly in all 50 states, 
Puerto Rico, and Washington, D.C., for the principle that every 
individual's rights must be protected equally under the law, regardless 
of race, religion, gender, sexual orientation, disability, or national 
origin.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The reforms discussed below would also provide essential privacy 
protections for Americans, whose communications and data are swept up 
by the U.S. government's foreign intelligence surveillance in enormous 
quantities.\2\ As technological advances permit ever-broader forms of 
surveillance--including bulk collection--there is an urgent need for 
stronger legal safeguards.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \2\ See, e.g., Barton Gellman et al., In NSA-Intercepted Data, 
Those Not Targeted Far Outnumber the Foreigners Who Are, Wash. Post 
(July 5, 2014), https://www.washingtonpost.com/
world/national-security/in-nsa-intercepted-data-those-not-targeted-far-
outnumber-the-foreigners
-who-are/2014/07/05/8139adf8-045a-11e4-8572-4b1b969b6322--story.html; 
John Napier Tye, Meet Executive Order 12333: The Reagan Rule that lets 
the NSA spy on Americans, Wash. Post (July 18, 2014), https://
www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/meet-executive-order-12333-the-rea
gan-rule-that-lets-the-nsa-spy-on-americans/2014/07/18/93d2ac22-0b93-
11e4-b8e5-d0de80767f
c2--story.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    On July 16, the CJEU struck down the E.U.-U.S. Privacy Shield, used 
by over 5,300 companies, for failing to provide a sufficient level of 
protection for E.U. data.\3\ Specifically, the court found that U.S. 
surveillance authorities, including Section 702 of the Foreign 
Intelligence Surveillance Act (``FISA'') and Executive Order (``EO'') 
12333, permit large-scale surveillance that is not strictly necessary 
to the needs of the state. The court also found that the Privacy Shield 
failed to create adequate redress mechanisms for Europeans whose data 
is transferred to the U.S.--namely, the ability to be heard by an 
independent and impartial court.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \3\ C-311/18, Data Protection Comm'r v. Facebook Ireland Ltd. & 
Maximilian Schrems ``Schrems II'') (July 16, 2020), http://
curia.europa.eu/juris/document/document.jsf?text=&docid=228677
&pageIndex=0&doclang=EN&mode=req&dir=&occ=first=1&cid=15476758.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    In addition to invalidating Privacy Shield, the CJEU's ruling 
indicated serious problems with companies' reliance on a separate 
mechanism, Standard Contractual Clauses (SCCs), for data transfers from 
the E.U. to the U.S., given the scope of U.S. surveillance and 
obstacles to redress. Based on the CJEU's ruling, the European Data 
Protection Board recently issued draft guidance concerning SCCs that 
would make it virtually impossible to transfer personal data to 
``electronic communication service providers,'' 50 U.S.C. 
Sec. 1881(b)(4), inside the U.S. for processing.\4\ Indeed, the Irish 
Data Protection Commissioner has already issued a preliminary order to 
Facebook to halt its transfers to the U.S. about its E.U. users.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \4\ See European Data Protection Board, Recommendations 01/2020 on 
measures that supplement transfer tools to ensure compliance with the 
EU level of protection of personal data (Nov. 10, 2020), https://
edpb.europa.eu/sites/edpb/files/consultation/edpb--recommendations
--202001--supplementary measurestransferstools--en.pdf; see also, e.g., 
Omer Tene, Vice President at the International Association of Privacy 
Professionals, Quick Reaction to EDPB Schrems II Guidance, https://
www.linkedin.com/pulse/quick-reaction-edpb-schrems-ii-guidance-omer-
tene (``it's hard to see a clear path for data transfers to the US'').
    \5\ Sam Schechner & Emily Glazer, Ireland to Order Facebook to Stop 
Sending User Data to U.S., Wall St. J. (Sept. 9, 2020), https://
www.wsj.com/articles/ireland-to-order-facebook-to-stop-sending-user-
data-to-u-s-11599671980.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The CJEU's ruling and the European Data Protection Board's guidance 
pose significant problems for U.S. companies in places as diverse as 
Boca Raton, Florida, San Francisco, California, and Cleveland, Ohio, 
who relied on Privacy Shield and currently rely on SCCs to transfer 
data from the E.U. for processing and storage in the U.S. In many 
cases, companies rely on these data-transfer mechanisms for critical 
functions, such as providing services to customers overseas or human 
resources to a global workforce.
    Below, we describe several reforms critical to ensuring future 
transatlantic data flows. Although we propose reforms to both Section 
702 and EO 12333 surveillance, the Section 702 reforms are especially 
urgent. That is because the Section 702 collection of data ``at rest'' 
inside the United States is an insurmountable obstacle to the 
functioning of SCCs.
    In particular, to address the CJEU's ruling, Congress must:

   Narrow the scope of Section 702 and EO 12333 surveillance;

   Expand the role of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance 
        Court in Supervising Section 702 and EO 12333 surveillance;

   Ensure that individuals affected by U.S. surveillance can 
        challenge improper surveillance in court; and

   Limit retention and use of information under Section 702 and 
        EO 12333.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \6\ These reforms would not necessarily be sufficient to satisfy 
U.S. constitutional requirements.

    Separately, Congress must also work to pass comprehensive consumer 
privacy protections. That legislation must provide clear and strong 
data-usage rules and ensure that discrimination cannot take on new life 
in the 21st century. It must also allow states to enact stronger 
protections and provide people the opportunity to sue companies that 
violate their privacy. However, we note that these privacy protections, 
while essential, will not address the concerns of the CJEU, which 
focused on the U.S. government's overbroad surveillance authorities and 
obstacles to redress for government surveillance. To address the ruling 
in Schrems II, the path forward requires reforms to Section 702 and EO 
12333.
                               Background
    Under E.U. law, companies are generally forbidden from transferring 
personal data to non-E.U. countries on a repeated or systematic basis, 
unless the transfer is conducted pursuant to one of the following:

        1. Special Transfer Mechanisms. Companies may, through 
        contracts such as SCCs or similar mechanisms, establish certain 
        rules for data transfers to safeguard privacy rights. In some 
        contexts, these safeguards can compensate for deficiencies in a 
        non-E.U. country's law--e.g., if the non-E.U. country lacks 
        protections for consumer privacy, companies may use an SCC to 
        commit to extend basic rights to consumers vis-a-vis the 
        companies.

        In the U.S., however, no contract is capable of overcoming the 
        fundamental problems with U.S. law identified by the CJEU: 
        namely, the scope of U.S. foreign intelligence surveillance and 
        obstacles to redress. No contract between two companies can 
        narrow the sweep of government surveillance or ensure that 
        targeted customers receive notice of classified surveillance.

        2. Adequacy Decision. The European Commission may conclude, as 
        a categorical matter, that a non-E.U. country provides an 
        ``adequate'' level of protection through its domestic law and 
        international commitments--as it did through Safe Harbor and 
        then Privacy Shield--but the Commission's adequacy decisions 
        are subject to review by the CJEU. The CJEU has interpreted the 
        ``adequacy'' standard to require that the non-E.U. country 
        provide a level of protection of fundamental rights and 
        freedoms that is ``essentially equivalent'' to those provided 
        under E.U. law.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \7\ Schrems II  201, 203.

        Because the CJEU has identified fundamental defects in U.S. 
        law, discussed in greater detail below, U.S. reforms should be 
        a prerequisite to the negotiation of a new E.U.-U.S. data-
        transfer agreement. Indeed, European Commissioner Didier 
        Reynders has stated publicly that ``no quick fix'' will 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
        adequately address the requirements of E.U. law.

        But even if the European Commission were to agree to a quick 
        fix, U.S. companies would still face substantial economic 
        risks--including the risk that individual member-state Data 
        Protection Authorities (``DPAs'') would halt data flows. In 
        analyzing transfers conducted pursuant to SCCs and similar 
        mechanisms, DPAs are not bound by the European Commission's 
        conclusions about whether a non-E.U. country's laws are 
        adequate. Indeed, prior Commission adequacy decisions have 
        acknowledged DPAs' authority to arrive at their own independent 
        conclusions about whether to halt data transfers. And notably, 
        in Schrems II, the CJEU held that DPAs are required to suspend 
        data transfers if they conclude that such transfers are 
        unlawful.

        To ensure that any new E.U.-U.S. data-transfer agreement 
        withstands CJEU scrutiny, and to ensure that U.S. companies do 
        not pay the price for a failed ``quick fix,'' Congress must 
        enact the reforms below.
                          Reforms to U.S. Law
1. Narrow the Scope of Section 702 and EO 12333 Surveillance
    For an adequacy decision to survive CJEU scrutiny, the non-E.U. 
country's laws may interfere with the protection of personal data 
``only in so far as is strictly necessary.'' \8\ In Schrems I, the CJEU 
explained that, in conducting surveillance, the third country must 
employ an ``objective criterion'' limiting surveillance to purposes 
that are ``specific, strictly restricted and capable of justifying the 
interference.'' \9\ It also held that government access ``on a 
generalised basis to the content of electronic communications'' 
violates the ``essence'' of the right to private life.\10\ In Schrems 
II, the CJEU elaborated on these concerns with respect to Section 702 
and EO 12333 surveillance. It explained that Section 702 ``does not 
indicate any limitations on the power it confers to implement 
surveillance programs,'' and it observed that the U.S. government 
collects communications in ``bulk'' under EO 12333\11\--i.e., it 
accesses communications on a ``generalised basis.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \8\ C-362-14, Schrems v. Data Protection Comm'r (``Schrems I'')  
92 (Sept. 23, 2015), http://curia.europa.eu/juris/document/
document.jsf?text=&docid=169195&pageIndex=0&doclang=en&
mode=lst&dir=&occ=first=1&cid=10588011.
    \9\ Schrems I  93.
    \10\ Schrems I  94.
    \11\ Schrems II  183.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Congress should act immediately to narrow the scope of both Section 
702 and EO 12333.
    With respect to Section 702, Congress can begin to address this 
issue by requiring an executive branch finding of reasonable suspicion 
that surveillance targets are ``foreign powers'' or ``agents of a 
foreign power'' outside of the United States--a clear ``objective 
criterion'' to justify the interference with private 
communications.\12\ In the alternative, Congress could narrow the 
definition of ``foreign intelligence information'' under 50 U.S.C. 
?1801(e), though this reform may not be sufficient to address the 
CJEU's concerns about the breadth of Section 702 surveillance.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \12\ Notably, ``foreign power'' and ``agent of a foreign power'' 
are defined rather broadly under FISA to include international 
terrorists, political factions, and entities acting under a foreign 
government's effective control. See 50 U.S.C. Sec. 1801(a)-(b).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    With respect to EO 12333, Congress should prohibit bulk collection 
and require that surveillance be directed at specified targets. 
Separately, Congress should narrow EO 12333's definition of ``foreign 
intelligence,'' which currently allows the government to conduct 
surveillance to obtain any ``information relating to the capabilities, 
intentions, or activities of . . . foreign persons.''
2. Expand the Role of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court in 
        Supervising Section 702 and EO 12333 Surveillance
    In invalidating Privacy Shield, the CJEU focused largely on the 
lack of independent approval of surveillance targets under Section 702 
and EO 12333. Under Section 702, the role of the FISC consists mainly 
of an annual review of general targeting and minimization procedures; 
the FISC does not evaluate whether there is sufficient justification to 
conduct surveillance on specific targets. Under EO 12333, the FISC has 
no role at all.
    To address these concerns, and to ensure greater protection for 
Americans whose communications and data are swept up in this 
surveillance, Congress must enact significant changes to the FISC's 
role in supervising Section 702 and EO 12333 surveillance. At a 
minimum, the FISC or other independent entity should review targeting 
decisions on an individual ex post basis. Although this reform would 
likely require Congress to expand the number of FISC judges, it would 
enhance privacy protections for Americans swept up in this surveillance 
and, given the concerns of the CJEU, it is essential to ensuring the 
free flow of data between the E.U. and the U.S.
3. Ensure that Individuals Affected by U.S. Surveillance Can Challenge 
        Improper Surveillance in Court
    In Schrems II, the CJEU affirmed that individuals whose personal 
data is transferred from the E.U. must have access to judicial remedies 
to challenge the treatment of their data--remedies they lack under the 
current legal framework in the U.S. As a general matter, individuals do 
not receive notice that their information has been collected for 
foreign intelligence purposes, even in cases where notice would not 
jeopardize an active investigation. The lack of notice makes it 
difficult--if not impossible--for people subjected to illegal 
surveillance to establish standing to challenge that surveillance in 
U.S. courts.
    Congress should enact two key reforms to expand access to 
meaningful remedies.
    First, a ``standing fix'': Congress can and should pass legislation 
to more clearly define what constitutes an ``injury'' in cases 
challenging government surveillance, as Senator Wyden and others 
proposed in a 2017 reform bill. While standing is a constitutional 
requirement, the Supreme Court has been clear that Congress has a role 
to play in defining what qualifies as an ``injury'' for the purposes of 
standing. Congress could, for example, explain that where a person 
takes objectively reasonable protective measures in response to a good-
faith belief that she is subject to surveillance, those protective 
measures constitute an injury-in-fact. This reform would allow more 
individuals to begin to litigate claims of unlawful surveillance in the 
public courts.
    Second, Congress should require the executive branch to provide 
delayed notice of foreign intelligence surveillance to targets of that 
surveillance, where such notice would not result in an imminent threat 
to safety or jeopardize an active investigation. In addition, FISA 
should be modified to define ``derived,'' to ensure that the government 
fully complies with its existing statutory notice obligations.
4. Limit Retention and Use of Information Under Section 702 and EO 
        12333
    In Schrems II, the CJEU found that U.S. surveillance law lacked 
sufficient safeguards, including with regard to the access and use of 
information.\13\ Under Section 702, the government has broad authority 
to retain and use the data it has collected. It can retain 
communications indefinitely if they are encrypted or are found to 
contain foreign intelligence information. Even for data that does not 
fall into either of these categories, the default retention period is 
as long as five years. The retention limitations for communications and 
data collected under EO 12333 are similar.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \13\ Schrems II  180.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Congress should enact additional restrictions on the use and 
retention of data collected under Section 702 and EO 12333. In 
particular, Congress should require that where an agency seeks to 
retain data beyond the default retention period, the agency must 
establish that the data falls within a narrow subset of critical 
``foreign intelligence.'' Congress should also limit the Section 702 
and EO 12333 default retention period to three years.
                               Conclusion
    For more information, please contact Senior Legislative Counsel 
Kate Ruane at [emailprotected] or (202) 675-2336, or Senior Staff 
Attorney Ashley Gorski at [emailprotected] or (212) 284-7305.
            Sincerely,
                                             Ronald Newman,
                                       National Political Director,
                                National Political Advocacy Department.

                                            Kathleen Ruane,
                                        Senior Legislative Counsel,
                                National Political Advocacy Department.

                                             Ashley Gorski,
                                             Senior Staff Attorney,
                                             National Security Project.

cc: Members of the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
Transportation
                                 ______
                                 
   Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Amy Klobuchar to 
                       Hon. Noah Joshua Phillips
    Senator Klobuchar: Economic Impact of the Privacy Shield 
Invalidation on Small Business. More than 5,300 U.S. companies--which 
contribute nearly $1.1 trillion in total U.S. trade in goods and 
services with the EU--were impacted by the invalidation of the Privacy 
Shield. In your testimony, you highlight that more than 65 percent of 
small and medium-sized businesses participated in the Privacy Shield 
and that almost two-thirds of worldwide startups surveyed had customers 
or users in other countries.

    Question 1. Can you elaborate on your concerns regarding the impact 
of the Privacy Shield's invalidation on small and medium-sized 
companies?
    Answer. My concern is that the invalidation of Privacy Shield will 
have an outsized impact on small and medium-sized businesses. The 
program allowed U.S. businesses interested in European markets a simple 
and economical way to engage in necessary data transfers, for example 
of payment and shipping information. That is why some 65 percent of the 
thousands of companies that enrolled in Privacy Shield were small and 
medium-sized businesses. Without it, these firms may be forced to shut 
down or limit access to transatlantic markets. While there are other 
legal bases through which to transfer the data of European customers to 
the U.S., they are costly and complicated; in most cases they are not 
viable options for smaller business. The net effect will be higher 
costs for small and medium-sized businesses and an uneven playing field 
that favors larger firms.

    Question 2. In your view, what measures help ensure secure and 
stable cross-border data protections, particularly for small and 
medium-sized businesses?
    Answer. Small and medium-sized businesses, like all businesses, 
benefit from stable, efficient, and economical means to transfer data 
across borders. The most important thing we can do is to finalize a new 
agreement with our European partners that will once again permit U.S. 
businesses efficiently and economically to transfer data from Europe. 
U.S. and EU negotiators are already hard at work on a replacement for 
Privacy Shield, and the Biden Administration should make it a priority 
to complete that effort.
    Congress should continue to support these efforts, as should the 
Federal Trade Commission.
    As we move forward, in particular in engagement with our allies in 
Europe, we must ensure that an American voice and point of view is part 
of the discussion about Internet governance, and be willing to defend 
our approach. Liberal democracies that value free speech and privacy 
should prioritize regulatory interoperability, and not let relatively 
minor differences impede mutually-beneficial commerce.
                                 ______
                                 
   Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Amy Klobuchar to 
                         Prof. Neil M. Richards
    Consumer Access and Control/Privacy Shield Invalidation. In July, 
the European Union struck down the Privacy Shield following allegations 
that Facebook was providing U.S. intelligence agencies with unlimited 
access to customers' data. In your testimony, you note that if the U.S. 
had ``adequate'' privacy legislation, the Privacy Shield would be 
unnecessary. Last December, I joined Senators Cantwell, Schatz, and 
Markey in introducing comprehensive privacy legislation to establish 
digital rules to protect consumers' data.

    Question 1. While our bill is focused on commercial surveillance, 
do you agree that legislation like ours would help the U.S. strengthen 
privacy protections and rebuild trust with the EU?
    Answer. Thank you for the opportunity to answer such perceptive and 
important questions. Strong, baseline commercial privacy legislation is 
essential to rebuilding trust with our EU trading partners and allies--
and it would also be a tremendously good thing for Americans.
    First, commercial privacy protections would strengthen our 
critically important relationships with the EU. At the December 
hearing, Mr. Sullivan from the Commerce Department suggested that there 
is not an international consensus on privacy rights. Simply put, he is 
wrong. There is an international consensus, and it is one being driven 
by the EU approach to privacy--including commercial privacy--as a 
fundamental right. As I have explored in some of my scholarship, while 
the United States used to be the global leader on privacy, it has ceded 
that right by inaction. The failure of successive Congresses over the 
past two decades to pass a comprehensive privacy statute has meant not 
just that Americans have had insufficient privacy protection in a time 
of rapid technological change, not just that this inadequacy has 
affected our global reputation, not just that the EU has taken the lead 
on global privacy standards, but that the EU standard has become a 
global trade standard. If the United States wants to participate in 
these vital markets, it now has to do so according to standards that 
the EU has shaped through instruments like the Data Protection 
Directive and the GDPR.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ See Woodrow Hartzog & Neil M. Richards, Privacy's 
Constitutional Moment and the Limits of Data Protection 61 Boston 
College Law Review 1687 (2020).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    It's important to stress that since the 1990s, the European data 
protection regime (first the Directive, and since 2018 the GDPR) has 
primarily focused on what we'd call commercial privacy. The EU 
originated as the Common Market and has evolved from a trade 
federation, under the sensible idea that countries that trade together 
and share common economic interests become stronger allies and better 
partners. Before the Snowden Revelations and the Schrems litigation 
that it spawned, issues of cross-border data flows were primarily 
commercial trade issues, and the issues of ``adequacy'' of U.S. law 
largely revolved around whether companies like Google were processing 
the data of Europeans in ways that were consistent with EU law and the 
fundamental right to privacy and data protection those laws protect. 
The Schrems litigation has been of course about intelligence services 
accessing the data of Europeans, but if the United States wants to be 
deemed ``adequate'' and participate in the international data trade as 
an equal, respected, trusted partner, robust commercial privacy 
protections for all personal data held by U.S. companies will be 
essential. In this way, as I suggested at the December hearing, 
comprehensive commercial privacy reform by this Congress is a necessary 
(though not sufficient) condition for preserving and building trusted, 
sustainable, and profitable commercial relationships with our key 
European allies around personal data.
    Second, putting the relationships with our European friends 
entirely to the side, comprehensive privacy reform would be good for 
America. Today, American consumers are at the mercy of powerful 
corporations that collect and process their data. The current American 
privacy regime relying on fictional notice and illusory choice utterly 
fails to protect American consumers from manipulation and exposure to 
data breaches, and I am gratified to see that a bipartisan consensus 
has emerged that recognizes these facts and is keen to do something 
about them. The good news is that comprehensive privacy reform can be 
good for business as well as for consumers. Good businesses rest on 
trust, and the kinds of trusted, sustainable relationships that can 
last for decades. To use a technology example, many American consumers 
have decades-long trusted relationships with companies like Apple or 
Microsoft, and feel comfortable sharing sensitive information because 
they believe that those companies will be discreet, honest, protective, 
and loyal with their data. Unfortunately, this is not the case for many 
companies in the technology sector, particularly those who offer 
``free'' services in exchange for sotto voce data barter transactions, 
the terms of which are almost impossible for consumers to understand, 
much less agree to freely. Sensible comprehensive privacy laws that 
protect consumers would reward the many companies that are already 
engaging in such behavior, and would eliminate any competitive 
advantage to cheat when it comes to data protection and consumer 
protection.

    Question 2. Our bill also includes a provision to require companies 
to establish a privacy security program to regularly assess security 
vulnerabilities. Do you agree that data security programs can play a 
key role in ensuring secure and stable cross-border data protections?
    Answer. Absolutely. Meaningful data security requirements that 
ensure corporate accountability are critical for the consumer trust 
that is necessary for cross-border data sharing. In addition, data 
security has long been an obvious and essential part of the language of 
data protection, and it is part of the requirements of the GDPR for 
adequate levels (or to put it another way ``essentially equivalent'' 
levels) of data protection. GDPR Art. 45 & Recital 104. Comprehensive 
data security programs of the sort advocated by the FTC foreground the 
importance of data security, while they also regularize and 
professionalize its practice in firms. The key to security programs, 
however, is accountability--security program requirements must have 
teeth that require substantively adequate security under the 
circumstances and cannot be reduced to safe harbors that relieve 
companies of liability if they maintain minimal measures or go through 
a mere process of compliance.
                                 ______
                                 
   Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Kyrsten Sinema to 
                         Prof. Neil M. Richards
    Small Businesses. Small businesses power Arizona's growing economy. 
We need to remove unnecessary burdens, and increase transparency and 
accessibility to support small businesses.

    Question 1. How does the European Court of Justice's invalidation 
of the Privacy Shield framework harm small businesses that need to 
transfer data to or from Europe?
    Answer. The European Court of Justice's invalidation of the Privacy 
Shield framework harms all American businesses and consumers, but many 
small businesses are likely to suffer particular harms. Those 
businesses that need to transfer data from Europe can no longer rely on 
the Privacy Shield to protect the transfer, and as small businesses 
they are unlikely to possess the resources to generate binding 
corporate rules. In the absence of an adequacy determination, this 
leaves only the model contracts, whose validity was called into 
question by the ECJ in Schrems II. Under current post-Schrems II 
guidance from the European Data Protection Board, companies seeking to 
use the model contracts need to engage in a case-by-case analysis to 
assess the sufficiency of data protections for such transfers outside 
the European Economic Area. This analysis requires companies to assess 
not just the transfer, but the risks the transfer faces in the context 
of the privacy and intelligence regimes governing the transfer. In 
essence, this requires companies to engage in a full Schrems II-style 
ongoing analysis for each kind of transfer--something that would be 
daunting for a huge company like Google or Amazon, and would be 
impossible for many small businesses to engage in. Thus, the harm faced 
by American small businesses is the imposition of a difficult, if not 
impossible regulatory burden should they wish to make transfers of EU 
personal data to the United States. This problem is caused by the 
mismatch between privacy and data protection regimes in the United 
States and the EU.

    Question 2. While a long-term solution is crafted, how can Congress 
support small businesses that need to transfer data to or from Europe?
    Answer. The best thing that Congress could do is to pass a 
comprehensive privacy statute with meaningful redress options for 
consumers, including a private right of action. The closer our American 
privacy regime gets to ``essential equivalence'' with the level of 
protection on the consumer side in the GDPR, the easier it will be to 
reach a durable, sustainable reconciliation with the EU. This is 
particularly the case because the Schrems II judgment left the model 
contractual clauses mechanism for cross-border transfer largely intact, 
subject to the caveat that European data exporters have to assess the 
risks of access in violation of EU data protection rights. To the 
extent that small business (and certainly particular kinds of small 
businesses) are less likely to have the kinds of data that the U.S. 
Intelligence Community might seek to access, this will be less of a 
problem for them. On the other hand, as I explained in the previous 
answer scope, difficulty, and expense of this analysis will be beyond 
the resources of many small businesses. However, a higher level of 
privacy protection for all data held in the U.S. (especially the data 
of Europeans) would tend to lower the temperature of the cross-border 
conflict with the EU, making it easier to reach long term solution--
ideally adequacy.
    Speaking of adequacy, I note that at the December hearing, Mr. 
Sullivan from the Commerce Department suggested that adequacy was 
difficult, even impossible, to achieve, citing the examples of (I 
believe) India and Brazil as being countries very different from the 
United States. Mr. Sullivan's explanation was misleading at best and 
disingenuous at worst, as he forgot to mention a country that has 
adequacy which is very similar to the United States: Canada. Canada has 
had adequacy since the days of the old Data Protection Directive. If 
Canada can achieve adequacy with its own comprehensive privacy law, 
PIPEDA, the United States can as well, and I have great optimism that 
the new administration will take a more nuanced and informed approach 
to privacy and data protection issues than the perspective Mr. Sullivan 
espoused at the hearing.
    The other things that Congress can do is related to remedies to 
challenge unlawful surveillance. Practical and legal obstacles to the 
challenge of assertedly unlawful surveillance programs in the United 
States are significant, and are in my opinion a significant rule of law 
challenge. As I argued in a widely-cited 2013 law review article, it is 
a basic element of the rule of law that a democratic, self-governing 
people should have the right to know and consent to what is being done 
by their intelligence services in their name, and there should be 
appropriate legal means to challenge surveillance programs that are 
asserted to be illegal or unconstitutional, just as with other 
government programs.\2\ To the extent that there are currently 
obstacles to relief, such obstacles are a major part of the problem 
with U.S. law that led to the invalidation of the Safe Harbor Agreement 
in Schrems I and the Privacy Shield in Schrems II. Indeed, much of my 
own testimony in that case dealt with the substantial obstacles to 
relief--including standing doctrine--that plaintiffs face in 
surveillance challenges. Here, too, Congress can help. As the ACLU 
explained in its Statement on the Record in this hearing,
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \2\ See Neil M. Richards, The Dangers of Surveillance, 126 Harv. L. 
Rev. 1934 (2013).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Congress should enact two key reforms to expand access to 
meaningful remedies.

        First, a ``standing fix'': Congress can and should pass 
        legislation to more clearly define what constitutes an 
        ``injury'' in cases challenging government surveillance, as 
        Senator Wyden and others proposed in a 2017 reform bill. While 
        standing is a constitutional requirement, the Supreme Court has 
        been clear that Congress has a role to play in defining what 
        qualifies as an ``injury'' for the purposes of standing. 
        Congress could, for example, explain that where a person takes 
        objectively reasonable protective measures in response to a 
        good faith belief that she is subject to surveillance, those 
        protective measures constitute an injury-in-fact. This reform 
        would allow more individuals to begin to litigate claims of 
        unlawful surveillance in the public courts.

        Second, Congress should require the Executive Branch to provide 
        delayed notice of foreign intelligence surveillance to targets 
        of that surveillance, where such notice would not result in an 
        imminent threat to safety or jeopardize an active 
        investigation. In addition, FISA should be modified to define 
        ``derived,'' to ensure that the government fully complies with 
        its existing statutory notice obligations.

        American Civil Liberties Union, Statement on the Record re: The 
        Invalidation of the EU-US Privacy Shield and the Future of 
        Transatlantic Data Flows, December 9, 2020, at 5, available at 
        https://www.aclu.org/sites/default/files/field
        _document/2020-12-
        8_aclu_statement_for_the_record_senate_commerce_commit
        tee_hearing_on_privacy_shield.pdf.

    In my opinion, the reforms proposed by the ACLU (particularly the 
first) would be an excellent place for Congress to start.
                                 ______
                                 
    Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Brian Schatz to 
                         Prof. Neil M. Richards
    In your testimony, you asserted that it would be an ``important and 
necessary'' step, as well as good for business, to include a duty of 
loyalty in American privacy law.

    Question 1. How would including duty of loyalty in Federal privacy 
law help American businesses? What other laws and regulations have 
included the duties of loyalty and care?
    Answer. A duty of loyalty would help American businesses by setting 
clear rules of the road with respect to what constitutes fair business 
practices in an economy seemingly fueled by the exploitation of 
personal data. At an earlier hearing on privacy reform last fall, 
Senator, I was struck by the truth and wisdom of your statement that 
ethical companies already know that being loyal to their customers is 
good business, and so a duty of loyalty is only a burden for companies 
who want to be disloyal. In a market economy like ours, incentives for 
disloyalty can be a massive problem. When there are no rules, anything 
goes, and well-meaning companies staffed by ethical professionals 
nonetheless feel the unyielding pressures of the market to match the 
tactics of those who cheat and act in disloyal ways. A duty of loyalty 
would level the playing field and create incentives for competition and 
business innovation in ways that make things better for human 
customers, rather than creating incentives for companies to manipulate 
those consumers.
    To be sure, manipulation is a real risk here. In her excellent book 
The Age of Surveillance Capitalism, Harvard's Shoshana Zuboff explains 
how tech companies discovered that digital services create 
transactional metadata with many uses.\3\ These companies first used 
the data to improve their services, making them more efficient (such as 
by refining their search engines or interfaces) in ways that made 
things better for everyone--the tech companies and their human 
customers. The second step though, allowed companies to use 
transactional and other data to anticipate or predict what consumers 
could want or how they could be more effectively marketed to or 
influenced through ``personalization.'' Zuboff goes on to describe a 
third stage--the use of transactional data and the techniques of 
behavioral science to manipulate consumers and have them behave in ways 
that were optimal to the companies or their advertiser clients. The 
first of these stages--product improvement through data--is a good 
thing in which the incentives of consumers and companies align to want 
better products. The second, prediction (sometimes called 
``personalization'') is problematic when it is used in ways that are 
not in the best interests of the consumers, and the third--outright 
manipulation--is almost always problematic. At present, many uses of 
data that fall in categories two and three are legal. What's more, 
because thin, opt-out consent is easy to manufacture in a digital 
environment, any mere opt-out regime would be insufficient to protect 
consumers.\4\ A duty of loyalty requiring companies to act in the best 
interests of their vulnerable human customers would help solve these 
problems. It would ensure that category two cases use the benefits of 
personalization to advance the interests of consumers, rather than 
preying on their individual vulnerabilities and human cognitive 
limitations. And it would also eliminate problematic cases of outright 
manipulation in category three, in which a company can use information 
it knows about a consumer to get them to dance to its own tune.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \3\ Shoshana Zuboff, The Age of Surveillance Capitalism (2019).
    \4\ Neil Richards & Woodrow Hartzog, The Pathologies of Digital 
Consent, 96 Wash. U.L. Rev. 1461 (2019).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Duties of loyalty are not a new idea. In fact, they have a long and 
proud tradition in Anglo-American law. Many duties of loyalty arise in 
the fiduciary context, in which there is a less sophisticated party who 
must trust another who possesses more power, wealth, or expertise. As 
Dr. Woodrow Hartzog and I explain in our detailed paper, ``A Duty of 
Loyalty for Privacy Law,'' our law has imposed loyalty duties on a wide 
variety of relationships typified by power differentials, including the 
law of trustees, corporate officers, agents, guardians of wards, 
lawyers, doctors, financial advisors, and others.\5\ This body of law 
is extensive, and it has ancient roots in our law. Imposing a duty of 
loyalty on a relationship is a significant step, but it is a time-
honored and appropriate step where there is vulnerability. As we argue 
in our paper on loyalty, the current digital environment is 
characterized by vulnerability, in which human consumers and citizens 
trust their online experiences and well-being to powerful, 
sophisticated, and highly capitalized technology companies. In so 
doing, they are exposed to risks of manipulation, malware, identity 
theft, misinformation, nudging, and radicalization, among others. Our 
thesis is simple: ``a duty of loyalty framed in terms of the best 
interests of digital consumers should become a basic element of U.S. 
data privacy law. A duty of loyalty would compel loyal acts and also 
constrain conflicted, self-dealing behavior by companies. It would 
shift the default legal presumptions surrounding a number of common 
design and data processing practices. It would also act as an 
interpretive guide for government actors and data collectors to resolve 
ambiguities inherent in other privacy rules. A duty of loyalty, in 
effect, would enliven almost the entire patchwork of U.S. data privacy 
laws. And it would do it in a way that is consistent with U.S. free 
expression goals and other civil liberties.'' \6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \5\ Neil Richards & Woodrow Hartzog, A Duty of Loyalty for Privacy 
Law, at ms. 22-23. (draft article forthcoming 2021), available at 
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id
=3642217.
    \6\ Id. at ms. 7.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    At the hearing, we heard testimony that the European Commission 
considers the privacy laws of only a couple of countries to be 
``adequate'' for international data transfers.

    Question 2. Would a comprehensive privacy law that includes a duty 
of loyalty, help the United States achieve ``adequacy'' by the European 
Commission for international data transfers?
    Answer. In all, the EU has granted adequacy to twelve nations or 
jurisdictions--Andorra, Argentina, Canada, the Faroe Islands, Guernsey, 
Israel, the Isle of Man, Japan, Jersey, New Zealand, Switzerland, and 
Uruguay. In addition, advanced talks are in progress with both South 
Korea and the post-Brexit United Kingdom.\7\ I should also note that I 
followed the discussion of adequacy by Mr. Sullivan at the hearing with 
great interest. It is correct that the EU made an adequacy 
determination for a group of countries, but the prospects for adequacy 
are hardly as bleak as Mr. Sullivan suggested. As I explained in my 
response to Sen. Sinema's questions, Mr. Sullivan omitted Canada from 
his examples of countries that have obtained adequacy, though I must 
assume that this was merely an oversight on his part. In fact, if we 
look at the countries that have achieved adequacy, many are like the 
United States in important respects, and many of them are post-
industrial democracies with advanced technologies and a robust 
commitment to the rule of law. Moreover, as I have already mentioned, 
the fact that Canada has been deemed adequate for two decades suggests 
that if the United States were to do the things that are necessary for 
adequacy, the EU would be delighted to bring the United States into 
that group.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \7\ European Commission, Adequacy Decisions, visited Feb. 9, 2021, 
available at https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/law-topic/data-protection/
international-dimension-data-protection/adequacy-decisions_en.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    I would be happy to talk more about adequacy at a future hearing, 
but for now I can answer your question succinctly by saying the 
following. The EU evolved from a trade federation and common market, 
and its laws are largely related to those interests. Until the Schrems 
litigation, adequacy was seen as almost exclusively a question of 
commercial data--were the protections for personal data in a particular 
country ``essentially equivalent'' to those in the EU such that an 
adequacy determination was warranted? The Schrems cases raise questions 
of intelligence gathering and of intelligence reform if the United 
States wishes to participate fully in the trans-Atlantic data trade, 
but it still remains true that adequacy determinations require 
substantial commercial protections. Article 45 of the GDPR governs 
adequacy determinations, and provides that, in assessing the adequacy 
of a country's level of data protection, the European Commission must 
look at (a) its rule of law, respect for human rights (including 
privacy and data protection), and relevant laws governing government 
access to personal data, as well as whether there are ``effective and 
enforceable data subject rights and effective administrative and 
judicial redress for the data subjects whose personal data are being 
transferred''; (b) the existence of agencies that supervise compliance 
with data protection rules, and (c) a country's international 
commitments on data protection issues. GDPR Recital 104 helpfully 
clarifies this standard as whether the country can ``offer guarantees 
ensuring an adequate level of protection essentially equivalent to that 
ensured within the Union.''
    Thus, there are two key parts to an adequacy determination: (1) a 
comprehensive privacy law imposing affirmative duties on companies that 
process our data, and providing remedies for violations, and (2) 
surveillance reform. With respect to (1), it is my opinion that a 
robust comprehensive U.S. privacy law containing a duty of loyalty 
would offer the best pathway to satisfying element (1). A duty of 
loyalty would constrain companies from acting in self-interested ways 
with our data (and with the data of EU citizens), it would offer 
remedies for violations, and it would contribute to the overall 
robustness and commitment to the rule of law for data processing in the 
United States. It would go a long way to providing the key ``essential 
equivalence'' with respect to commercial data that adequacy hinges on--
particularly as the EU itself is considering a variant of a duty of 
loyalty as it continues to develop its own privacy laws.\8\ Moreover, 
for the reasons I have given in these responses and elsewhere in my 
writings, I believe that a duty of loyalty for privacy law in the 
United States would also be excellent policy.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \8\ See, e.g., European Commission, Proposal for a Regulation on 
European Data Governance (Data Governance Act), Nov. 25 2020 
(containing a duty, like a duty of loyalty, under which ``Data sharing 
providers that intermediate the exchange of data between individuals as 
data holders and legal persons should, in addition, bear fiduciary duty 
towards the individuals, to ensure that they act in the best interest 
of the data holders.''), available at https://ec.europa.eu/digital-
single-market/en/news/proposal-regulation-european-data-governance-
data-governance-act.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                  [all]

