
 - NOMINATION OF THOMAS B. CHAPMAN, NOMINEE TO BE A MEMBER, NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD

[Senate Hearing 116-635]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]




                                                        S. Hrg. 116-635

                    NOMINATION OF THOMAS B. CHAPMAN,
                        NOMINEE TO BE A MEMBER,
                  NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD

=======================================================================

                                HEARING

                               before the

                         COMMITTEE ON COMMERCE,
                      SCIENCE, AND TRANSPORTATION
                          UNITED STATES SENATE

                     ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

                             FIRST SESSION

                               __________

                           DECEMBER 11, 2019

                               __________

    Printed for the use of the Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
                             Transportation




                 [GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]




                Available online: http://www.govinfo.gov


                               ______
                                 

                 U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

52-941 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2023















       SENATE COMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, SCIENCE, AND TRANSPORTATION

                     ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

                             FIRST SESSION

                  ROGER WICKER, Mississippi, Chairman

JOHN THUNE, South Dakota             MARIA CANTWELL, Washington, 
ROY BLUNT, Missouri                      Ranking
TED CRUZ, Texas                      AMY KLOBUCHAR, Minnesota
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska                RICHARD BLUMENTHAL, Connecticut
JERRY MORAN, Kansas                  BRIAN SCHATZ, Hawaii
DAN SULLIVAN, Alaska                 EDWARD MARKEY, Massachusetts
CORY GARDNER, Colorado               TOM UDALL, New Mexico
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee          GARY PETERS, Michigan
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia  TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
MIKE LEE, Utah                       TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
RON JOHNSON, Wisconsin               JON TESTER, Montana
TODD YOUNG, Indiana                  KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
RICK SCOTT, Florida                  JACKY ROSEN, Nevada

                       John Keast, Staff Director
                  Crystal Tully, Deputy Staff Director
                      Steven Wall, General Counsel
                 Kim Lipsky, Democratic Staff Director
              Chris Day, Democratic Deputy Staff Director
                      Renae Black, Senior Counsel











                            C O N T E N T S

                              ----------                              
                                                                   Page
Hearing held on December 11, 2019................................     1
Statement of Senator Wicker......................................     1
Statement of Senator Cantwell....................................     2

                               Witnesses

Thomas B. Chapman, Nominee to be a Member, National 
  Transportation Safety Board....................................     2
    Prepared statement...........................................     5
    Biographical information.....................................     6

                                Appendix

Response to written questions submitted to Thomas B. Chapman by:
    Hon. John Thune..............................................    21
    Hon. Gary Peters.............................................    21







 
                    NOMINATION OF THOMAS B. CHAPMAN,
                        NOMINEE TO BE A MEMBER,
                  NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD

                              ----------                              


                      WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 11, 2019

                                       U.S. Senate,
        Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation,
                                                    Washington, DC.
    The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 11:06 a.m., in 
room SD-G50, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Roger Wicker, 
Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
    Present: Senators Wicker [presiding], Cantwell, Baldwin, 
and Rosen.

            OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ROGER WICKER, 
                 U.S. SENATOR FROM MISSISSIPPI

    The Chairman. I will now call to order a hearing to 
consider the nomination of Tom Chapman to serve as a Member of 
the National Transportation Safety Board for a term expiring 
December 31, 2023.
    Mr. Chapman is well known by many of us as he currently 
serves as Minority Counsel to the Senate Commerce Subcommittee 
on Aviation and Space and has worked with us in this capacity 
since 2014. His extensive experience in the aviation sector 
spans his entire career. Prior to his service to our committee, 
he spent eight years as Vice President for Government Affairs 
at US Airways.
    Additionally, he previously worked as Legislative Counsel 
at Southwest Airlines and spent 16 years working at the 
Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association in various policy and 
Government affairs roles. Mr. Chapman received his BFA in music 
from C.W. Post College in 1978 and his JD from the American 
University School of Law in 1982. The NTSB is an independent 
Federal agency. It investigates and determines the probable 
cause of all civil aviation accidents and other significant 
rail, highway, marine, and pipeline accidents.
    The Senate Commerce Committee relies on the professional 
expertise of the NTSB in performing our important oversight 
responsibilities and in crafting legislation to provide for the 
safety of the American public. NTSB board members frequently 
testify before our committee and provide critical insight and 
guidance on pressing matters of public safety.
    On behalf of the Committee, I would like to express my 
appreciation to the NTSB for the vital role they play and for 
the support they give to us. Mr. Chapman, I would like to thank 
you for testifying today and for your willingness to serve in 
this key position of public service.
    I look forward to learning more about your qualifications 
and background. And I now turn to my friend and Ranking Member 
for her opening remarks.

               STATEMENT OF HON. MARIA CANTWELL, 
                  U.S. SENATOR FROM WASHINGTON

    Senator Cantwell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As you 
mentioned, the NTSB plays a critical role in investigating 
transportation accidents, making recommendations that can 
prevent future accidents, save lives, and prevent injuries. So 
while the Board is a small agency, it is currently working on a 
number of critical safety issues and many of which have been 
before this Committee.
    The NTSB needs to be operating at full strength and that is 
why I am pleased to welcome Tom Chapman to this hearing today 
in his nomination to serve as a Board Member of the NTSB. You 
went through the various resume points of Mr. Chapman as he has 
worked with many of us first in the private sector, then later 
working under Ranking Member Nelson, and most recently under 
our tenure at the Committee. During that time, he has made 
significant contributions and obviously will continue in this 
focus on the important safety aviation priorities that we need 
to be working on.
    Prior to joining the Committee, as you mentioned, he worked 
extensively at airlines and airline operations safety. As a 
general aviation pilot, he knows how important oversight is, 
how essential it is, promoting safety, preventing deaths and 
injuries, and what we need to do to prevent accidents. So, I 
look forward to hearing from him today. Obviously one of the 
pleasures we get having worked with him is we actually get to 
meet your family today. And so I would also like to welcome his 
wife and son to the hearing as well.
    And I am sure you will make introductions, but again, thank 
you for this hearing, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for, Mr. 
Chapman, your willingness to serve the NTSB.
    The Chairman. Mr. Chapman, you are now recognized for your 
five-minute opening statement. Your entire statement will be 
entered into the record at this point. But feel free to take a 
moment to point out family members, and particularly any other 
family members that might be here other than your wife and son.

    STATEMENT OF THOMAS B. CHAPMAN, NOMINEE TO BE A MEMBER, 
              NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD

    Mr. Chapman. Absolutely, Mr. Chairman. I do want to 
introduce the two people who are most important to me. My wife, 
Scotty O'Connell. She is my partner and best friend and she has 
been for these past 34 years. I get a little choked up about 
that. And next to Scotty is our handsome son Patrick. We are 
very proud of Patrick who is currently a senior at St. John's 
College High School here in Washington. By this time next year 
he will be away at college and Scotty and I will probably be in 
grief therapy some place----
    [Laughter.]
    Mr. Chapman. But we are very, very proud of him. Chairman 
Wicker and Ranking Member Cantwell, thank you for the 
opportunity to appear before you today. I am honored to be 
nominated to serve on the National Transportation Safety Board. 
I am grateful to Senator Schumer for recommending me and to 
President Trump for nominating me. I also want to thank former 
Ranking Member Bill Nelson for his support on my behalf, as 
well as former Chairman Jay Rockefeller for offering me the 
opportunity to serve on the staff of the Senate Commerce 
Committee. I greatly admire the members of the staff on both 
sides of the aisle who work so hard to facilitate the work of 
the Committee. I am proud to call those fine people my 
colleagues and my friends.
    Before proceeding, I want to introduce--actually I 
introduced them already so I will proceed. Mr. Chairman, 
appointment to the NTSB would be a rewarding opportunity to 
apply my experience and skills in a role allowing me to 
continue giving back through public service. My nearly four 
decades of experience have prepared me well for such a task. I 
have been deeply involved in an extensive range of aviation 
issues, often playing a key role in identifying and negotiating 
resolutions.
    In varying degrees, virtually every aspect of aviation 
involves considerations of safety. Consequently, an awareness 
and sensitivity to a pervasive culture of safety is embedded in 
my professional approach, consistent with the critical safety 
mission of the NTSB. In addition to my experience, I would 
bring at least two qualities to the position which I believe 
are valuable. First, I have benefited from an established 
reputation for collegiality and consensus-building.
    Second, I am committed to public service and believe that 
much is expected from those who are most fortunate. I am an 
aggressive advocate for the policy positions I am 
professionally obliged or personally committed to represent. 
However, I strive to demonstrate respect and appreciation for 
the views of those with whom I may disagree. I believe in 
compromise and I take pride in crafting solutions that will 
accommodate seemingly conflicting points of view. Many of those 
I consider my most valued professional friends and associates 
are those with whom I have most significantly clashed over past 
policy disputes.
    As for my commitment to service, I view it as a 
responsibility for those who were fortunate to have prospered 
from professional life in the private sector as I have. During 
the last five and a half years, I have been privileged to serve 
on the staff of the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
Transportation. I joined the Aviation subcommittee staff in 
anticipation of the major legislative effort required to 
reauthorize the Federal Aviation Administration. I worked 
collaboratively with the bipartisan Senate team throughout the 
114th Congress to develop a comprehensive FAA reauthorization 
bill passed by the Senate in April 2016. Subsequent 
negotiations that year with the House culminated in passage of 
the FAA Extension Safety and Security Act of 2016, passed that 
year by Congress in July 2016.
    Efforts to agree on long-term comprehensive legislation 
then continued in the 115th Congress, resulting in passage of 
the FAA Reauthorization Act of 2018, signed into law October 5 
of last year. That five-year packaging negotiated on a 
bipartisan basis ensures long term stability and various 
important reforms of the FAA. It also reauthorized and reformed 
the Transportation Security Administration and the National 
Transportation Safety Board. I am proud of the major 
accomplishments to which I have contributed since joining the 
Commerce Committee staff.
    Looking forward, I want to offer a few thoughts regarding 
areas of focus I anticipate will be important should I have the 
honor of serving as a Member of the National Transportation 
Safety Board. As I see it, the agency is facing at least three 
challenges, three key challenges. First, autonomous vehicles 
and new technology. Advances in automation in the development 
of autonomous vehicles hold great promise for enhancing 
transportation safety. However, these advances present new 
questions and challenges, some of which will be difficult to 
anticipate. NTSB must keep pace with the rapid changes, and it 
must ensure that staff expertise is maintained, and that 
appropriate tools and technical skills are available or 
developed to meet the challenge.
    The second challenge I see is keeping pace with demand. 
NTSB's reputation as the world's premier transportation agency 
is well deserved. With such a reputation comes high 
expectations and meeting those expectations in a timely fashion 
is ever more important. The resources available to the agency 
are limited and may become more so. NTSB has performed 
admirably in ensuring that resources are targeted effectively. 
Maintaining that discipline will remain essential.
    Finally, the third challenge that I see is maintaining and 
developing staff. NTSB staff are renowned for their skill and 
expertise. The work of the agency is highly dependent on the 
dedication and unique abilities of its employees. Recruiting 
and retaining skilled team members is a challenge for any 
Government agency and particularly for one such as NTSB which 
requires such unique skill sets. Key to success in this area is 
ensuring the well-regarded culture and work environment at the 
agency is maintained. If confirmed, I will work collaboratively 
with the Chairman, my fellow board members, and the staff of 
NTSB to ensure the limited resources available to the agency 
are targeted efficiently and appropriately to meet these 
challenges and to fulfill NTSB's legislative mandate.
    My experience as an executive for three large entities has 
prepared me well for a leadership role at NTSB. I am familiar 
and have worked with budgeting and cost control practices 
having been responsible for developing and maintaining budgets 
for the various departments I have led throughout my career. 
Likewise, I have managed teams involving significant numbers of 
employees, focusing on an establishment and fulfillment of team 
objectives, response and adaptation to changing circumstances, 
and growth and development of individual team members.
    I welcome and will be honored by the opportunity to 
contribute my experience and skills to ensure the continuing 
success and effectiveness of the world's premiere 
transportation safety agency. Mr. Chairman, that concludes my 
remarks and I am happy to respond to questions.
    [The prepared statement and biographical information of Mr. 
Chapman follow:]

   Prepared Statement of Thomas B. Chapman, Nominee to be a Member, 
                  National Transportation Safety Board
    Chairman Wicker and Ranking Member Cantwell, thank you for the 
opportunity to appear before you today. I am honored to be nominated to 
serve on the National Transportation Safety Board. I am grateful to 
Senator Schumer for recommending me and to President Trump for 
nominating me.
    I also want to thank former Ranking Member Bill Nelson for his 
support on my behalf, as well as former Chairman Jay Rockefeller for 
offering me the opportunity to serve on the staff of the Senate 
Commerce Committee. I greatly admire the members of the staff on both 
sides of the aisle who work so hard to facilitate the work of the 
Committee. I am proud to call those fine people my colleagues and 
friends.
    Before proceeding, I want to introduce the two people most 
important to me. Sitting behind me is my wife Scotty O'Connell. She is 
my partner and best friend, and she has been for these past 34 years. 
Next to Scotty is our handsome son Patrick. We are very proud of 
Patrick, who is currently a senior at St. John's College High School 
here in Washington.
    Mr. Chairman, appointment to the NTSB would be a rewarding 
opportunity to apply my experience and skills in a role allowing me to 
continue giving back through public service.
    My nearly four decades of experience have prepared me well for such 
a task. I have been deeply involved in an extensive range of aviation 
issues, often playing a key role in identifying and negotiating 
resolutions. In varying degrees, virtually every aspect of aviation 
involves considerations of safety. Consequently, an awareness and 
sensitivity to a pervasive culture of safety is imbedded in my 
professional approach, consistent with the critical safety mission of 
the NTSB.
    In addition to my experience, I would bring at least two qualities 
to the position which I believe are valuable. First, I benefit from an 
established reputation for collegiality and consensus building. Second, 
I am committed to public service and believe that much is expected from 
those who are most fortunate.
    I am an aggressive advocate for the policy positions I am 
professionally obliged or personally committed to represent. However, I 
strive to demonstrate respect and appreciation for the views of those 
with whom I may disagree. I believe in compromise, and I take pride in 
crafting solutions that will accommodate seemingly conflicting points 
of view. Many of those I consider my most valued professional friends 
and associates are also those with whom I have most significantly 
clashed over past policy disputes.
    As for my commitment to service, I view it as a responsibility for 
those who are fortunate to have prospered from professional life in the 
private sector. During the last five and a half years, I have been 
privileged to serve on the staff of the Senate Committee on Commerce, 
Science, & Transportation. I joined the Aviation Subcommittee staff in 
anticipation of the major legislative effort required to reauthorize 
the Federal Aviation Administration. I worked collaboratively with the 
bipartisan Senate team throughout the 114th Congress to develop a 
comprehensive FAA Reauthorization bill passed by the Senate in April of 
2016. Subsequent negotiations with the House culminated in passage of 
the FAA Extension, Safety, and Security Act of 2016, passed by Congress 
in July of 2016.
    Efforts to agree on long-term, comprehensive legislation continued 
in the 115th Congress, resulting in passage of the FAA Reauthorization 
Act of 2018, signed into law October 5, 2018. That five-year package 
negotiated on a bipartisan basis ensures long-term stability and 
various important reforms of the FAA. It also reauthorized and reforms 
the Transportation Security Administration and the National 
Transportation Safety Board.
    I am proud of the major accomplishments to which I have contributed 
since joining the Commerce Committee staff. Looking forward, I want to 
offer a few thoughts regarding areas of focus I anticipate will be 
important should I have the honor of serving as a member of the 
National Transportation Safety Board.
    As I see it, the agency is facing at least three key challenges:

   Autonomous vehicles & new technology. Advances in automation 
        and the development of autonomous vehicles hold great promise 
        for enhancing transportation safety. However, these advances 
        present new questions and challenges--some of which will be 
        difficult to anticipate. NTSB must keep pace with the rapid 
        changes. It must ensure that staff expertise is maintained and 
        that appropriate tools and technical skills are available or 
        developed to meet the challenge.

   Keeping pace with demand. NTSB's reputation as the world's 
        premier transportation agency is well deserved. With such a 
        reputation comes high expectations, and meeting those 
        expectations in a timely fashion is ever more important. The 
        resources available to the agency are limited and may become 
        more so. NTSB has performed admirably in ensuring that 
        resources are targeted effectively. Maintaining that discipline 
        will remain essential.

   Maintaining & developing staff. NTSB staff are renowned for 
        their skill and expertise. The work of the agency is highly 
        dependent on the dedication and unique abilities of its 
        employees. Recruiting and retaining skilled team members is a 
        challenge for any government agency, and particularly for one 
        such as NTSB which requires such unique skillsets. Key to 
        success in this area is ensuring the well-regarded culture and 
        work environment of the agency is maintained.

    If confirmed, I will work collaboratively with the Chairman, my 
fellow Board Members, and the staff of NTSB to ensure the limited 
resources available to the agency are targeted efficiently and 
appropriately to meet these challenges and to fulfill NTSB's 
legislative mandate.
    My experience as an executive for three large entities has prepared 
me well for a leadership role at NTSB. I am familiar and have worked 
with budgeting and cost control practices, having been responsible for 
developing and managing budgets for the various departments I have lead 
throughout my career. Likewise, I have managed teams involving 
significant numbers of employees, focusing on establishment and 
fulfillment of team objectives, response and adaptation to changing 
circumstances, and growth and development of individual team members.
    I welcome and will be honored by the opportunity to contribute my 
experience and skills to ensure the continuing success and 
effectiveness of the world's premier transportation safety agency.
    Mr. Chairman, that concludes my remarks. I am happy to respond to 
questions.
                                 ______
                                 
                      a. biographical information
    1. Name (Include any former names or nicknames used): Thomas B. 
Chapman.
    2. Position to which nominated: Board Member, National 
Transportation Safety Board.
    3. Date of Nomination: October 17, 2019.
    4. Address (List current place of residence and office addresses):

        Residence: Information not released to the public.

        Office: Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, & 
        Transportation, Hart Senate Office Building, Washington, D.C. 
        20510

    5. Date and Place of birth: December 18, 1954; Denver, Colorado.
    6. Provide the name, position, and place of employment for you 
spouse (if married) and the names and ages of your children (including 
stepchildren and children by a previous marriage).

        Married January 25, 1986, to Mary Scott O'Connell (``Scotty''). 
        My wife retired in 2015 from the National Air & Space Museum. 
        She was with the Smithsonian Institution for 25 years, nearly 
        all of it at Air & Space.

    7. List all college and graduate degrees. Provide year and school 
attended.

        American University School of Law, Washington, D.C.
        Attended September 1979 through May 1982.
        Juris Doctor, May 1982.
        Admitted to the practice of law in Washington, D.C. and 
        Maryland.

        C.W. Post College, Greenvale, N.Y.
        Attended September 1973 through May 1978.
        Bachelor of Fine Arts in Music, May 1978.
        Full participant in Honors Program.
        Areas of concentration: political science, literature, and 
        education.

    8. List all post-undergraduate employment, and highlight all 
management-level jobs held and any non-managerial jobs that relate to 
the position for which you are nominated.

        Counsel
        Senate Subcommittee on Aviation Operations, Safety, & Security.
        Committee on Commerce, Science, & Transportation.
        July 2014 to Present.

                Joined Aviation Subcommittee staff in anticipation of 
                legislative effort to reauthorize the Federal Aviation 
                Administration. Worked collaboratively with bipartisan 
                Senate team throughout the 114th Congress to develop 
                comprehensive FAA Reauthorization bill passed by the 
                Senate in April of 2016. Subsequent negotiations with 
                the House culminated in the FAA Extension, Safety, and 
                Security Act of 2016, passed by Congress in July of 
                2016. Efforts to agree on long-term, comprehensive 
                legislation continued in the 115th Congress, resulting 
                in passage of the FAA Reauthorization Act of 2018, 
                signed into law October 5, 2018. The five-year package 
                negotiated on a bipartisan basis ensures long-term 
                stability and various important reforms of the FAA. It 
                also reauthorizes and reforms the Transportation 
                Security Administration and the National Transportation 
                Safety Board.

        Vice President for Government Affairs
        US Airways, Washington, D.C.
        October 2006 to January 2014.

                Recruited to manage Washington, D.C. office for the 
                ``new'' US Airways. Newly established company resulted 
                from 2005 merger of former US Airways and America West 
                Airlines. Served as primary Washington representative 
                on legislative matters, and contributed significantly 
                to Federal regulatory work and dealing with news media 
                on government affairs matters. During tenure, launched 
                enhanced internal fundraising campaign for US Airways 
                Political Action Committee, doubling the rate of 
                employee participation and tripling PAC financial 
                resources. Heavily involved in developing and 
                implementing government affairs strategies promoting 
                industry consolidation. Work on that company priority 
                culminated in successful agreement to merge US Airways 
                and American Airlines, creating the world's largest 
                airline.

        Legislative Counsel
        Southwest Airlines Co., Washington, D.C.
        January 1998 to October 2006.

                Recruited to establish and manage new Washington, D.C. 
                office to represent highly regarded Southwest Airlines. 
                Establishment of full-time Washington office 
                significantly enhanced the effectiveness of the 
                Company's government affairs efforts. Served as primary 
                Washington representative on legislative and regulatory 
                matters. Frequently called upon to represent the 
                Company in state and local government affairs arena, 
                particularly in the airline's newer east coast 
                destination cities. Helped organize and launch the 
                Company's first ever PAC, the Southwest Airlines 
                Freedom Fund. Dealt with news media on government 
                affairs matters.

        Senior Vice President for Government & Technical Affairs
        Aircraft Owners & Pilots Association, Washington, D.C.
        December 1996 to January 1998.

                Promoted to direct all federal, state, and local 
                government affairs activities for AOPA--a major 
                national association representing interests of over 
                340,000 members. Managed full-time professional staff 
                of eighteen in AOPA's Washington, D.C. and Frederick, 
                Maryland offices. Also managed state and local 
                activities of twelve Regional Representatives. AOPA's 
                government affairs program often cited as among the 
                most active of all national membership associations.

        Vice President & Legislative Counsel
        Aircraft Owners & Pilots Association, Washington, D.C.
        November 1988 to December 1996.

                Promoted to direct Federal and state legislative 
                programs and PAC for AOPA. Managed staff of six in 
                AOPA's Office of Legislative Affairs. During tenure, 
                substantially increased effectiveness and organization 
                of AOPA's legislative programs. Increased PAC fund-
                raising capability to secure it solidly among 50 
                largest PACs in the United States.

        State Legislative Counsel
        Aircraft Owners & Pilots Association, Washington, D.C.
        June 1985 to November 1988.

                Promoted to expand and direct AOPA's state legislative 
                program. Coordinated state legislative activities of 
                twelve Regional Representatives.

        Associate Counsel, Office of the General Counsel
        Aircraft Owners & Pilots Association, Washington, D.C.
        May 1982 to June 1985.

                Established and coordinated successful state 
                legislative program for AOPA. Drafted or reviewed all 
                Association contracts and participated heavily in 
                contract negotiations. Responsible for all trademark 
                and copyright issues. Gained experience in broad 
                spectrum of corporate legal matters.

    9. Attach a copy of your resume.
    A copy is attached.
    10. List any advisory, consultative, honorary, or other part-time 
service or positions with Federal, State, or local governments, other 
than those listed above, within the last ten years.
    None to report.
    11. List all positions held as an officer, director, trustee, 
partner, proprietor, agent, representative, or consultant of any 
corporation, company, firm, partnership, or other business, enterprise, 
educational, or other institution within the last ten years.

        Vice President for Government Affairs.
        US Airways, Washington, D.C.
        October 2006 to January 2014.

    12. Please list each membership you have had during the past ten 
years or currently hold with any civic, social, charitable, 
educational, political, professional, fraternal, benevolent or 
religiously affiliated organization., private club, or other membership 
organization. (For this question, you do not have to list your 
religious affiliation or membership in a religious house of worship or 
institution.). Include dates of membership and any positions you have 
held with any organization. Please note whether any such club or 
organization restricts membership on the basis of sex, race, color, 
religion, national origin, age, or disability.
    Member of the 116 Club . . . a private lunch club located at 234 
3rd Street, NE, in Washington, DC. Member since 2012.
    I have never been a member of nor have I associated with any 
organization which discriminates on the basis of sex, race, color, 
religion, national origin, age, or disability.
    13. Have you ever been a candidate for and/or held a public office 
(elected, non-elected, or appointed)? If so, indicate whether any 
campaign has any outstanding debt, the amount, and whether you are 
personally liable for that debt.
    None to report.
    14. List all memberships and offices held with and services 
rendered to, whether compensated or not, any political party or 
election committee within the past ten years. If you have held a paid 
position or served in a formal or official advisory position (whether 
compensated or not) in a political campaign within the past ten years, 
identify the particulars of the campaign, including the candidate, year 
of the campaign, and your title and responsibilities.
    None to report.
    15. Itemize all political contributions to any individual, campaign 
organization, political party, political action committee, or similar 
entity of $500 or more for the past ten years.

    1/26/2009                    Citizens for Arlen Specter         $  500
    7/6/2010                     Friends of John McCain             $  500
    6/15/2011                    Schweikert for Congress            $  500
    12/21/2011                   Pat Meehan for Congress            $  500
    2/24/2012                    Jeff Flake for U.S. Senate         $  500
    5/25/2012                    Bill Nelson for U.S. Senate        $1,000
    5/28/2013                    Team Graham                        $1,000
 

    16. List all scholarships, fellowships, honorary degrees, honorary 
society memberships, military medals, and any other special recognition 
for outstanding service or achievements.
    Recognized by the ARC of Frederick County, Maryland, for voluntary 
fundraising efforts in support of the organization's programs to help 
people with developmental disabilities.
    Recognized by both the National Parks Service and the Federal 
Aviation Administration for efforts as one of nine members appointed by 
the Clinton Administration to serve on the National Park Overflights 
Working Group. Over a two-year period, the Working Group successfully 
forged a compromise that served as a foundation for the FAA to develop 
reasonable regulations applying to scenic air tours over National 
Parks.
    17. Please list each book, article, column, Internet blog posting, 
or other publication you have authored, individually or with others. 
Include a link to each publication when possible. Also list any 
speeches that you have given on topics relevant to the position for 
which you have been nominated. Do not attach copies of these 
publications unless otherwise instructed.
    Through Internet research and a review of my personal files, I was 
able to identify several articles published in my name which are listed 
below. If requested, I am able to provide a copy of each article 
listed.
    Additional articles were likely published in my name, especially 
during my tenure on the staff of the Aircraft Owners & Pilots 
Association. However, I no longer have access to that material, nor was 
I able to identify other publications in the course of my research.

   ``Daschle is right about duplicate checks,'' Sioux Falls 
        Argus-Leader, June 3, 1995.

   ``Election '94--Aviation's Political Spectrum,'' AOPA Pilot 
        Magazine, February 1, 1994.

   ``Capitol Dispatch,'' AOPA Pilot Magazine, February 1992.

   ``Taxing Struggles: Legislative Update--1991,'' AOPA Pilot 
        Magazine, February 1991.

   ``State Affairs: 1987 in Review,'' AOPA Pilot Magazine, 
        January 1988.

    Regarding formal speeches, I have delivered few during my career. 
However, I have participated in significant numbers of panel 
discussions, conferences, and question-and-answer sessions. The 
instances during which I participated in such events are too numerous 
to recall.
    18. List digital platforms (including social media and other 
digital content sites) on which you currently or have formerly operated 
an account, regardless of whether or not the account was held in your 
name or an alias. Include the name of an ``alias'' or ``handle'' you 
have used on each of the named platforms. Indicate whether the account 
is active, deleted, or dormant. Include a link to each account if 
possible.
    I maintain a private Instagram account with a handful of followers, 
consisting of a few friends and family members. I am happy to arrange 
access to the account for review, if that would be helpful. https://
www.instagram.com/tbchapman01/
    19. Please identify each instance in which you have testified 
orally or in writing before Congress in a governmental or non-
governmental capacity and specify the date and subject matter of each 
testimony.
    To the best of my recollection, I testified before Congress on two 
occasions--both prior to 1998, while I was still employed by the 
Aircraft Owners & Pilots Association.
    I represented AOPA at a hearing before the Aviation Subcommittee of 
the House Committee on Public Works & Transportation. I testified 
regarding the impact of the so-called Wright Amendment, which limited 
flights out of Dallas Love Field in the State of Texas.
    I also represented AOPA at a hearing of the Senate Transportation 
Appropriations Subcommittee and testified regarding funding priorities 
for the coming fiscal year.
    Despite efforts to identify the details, I am unable to reference 
the precise dates on which these hearings took place.
    20. Given the current mission, major programs, and major 
operational objectives of the department/agency to which you have been 
nominated, what in your background or employment experience do you 
believe affirmatively qualifies you for appointment to the position for 
which you have been nominated, and why do you wish to serve in that 
position?
    I am honored to be nominated to serve on the National 
Transportation Safety Board. Appointment to the NTSB would be a 
rewarding opportunity to apply my experience and skills in a role 
allowing me to continue giving back through public service.
    My nearly four decades of experience in the aviation industry have 
prepared me well for such a task. I have been deeply involved in an 
extensive range of issues, often playing a key role in identifying and 
negotiating resolutions. In varying degrees, virtually every aspect of 
aviation involves considerations of safety. Consequently, an awareness 
and sensitivity to a pervasive culture of safety is imbedded in my 
professional approach, consistent with the critical safety mission of 
the NTSB.
    In addition to my experience, I would bring at least two qualities 
to the position which I believe are valuable. First, I benefit from an 
established reputation for collegiality and consensus building. Second, 
I am committed to public service and believe that much is expected from 
those who are most fortunate.
    I am an aggressive advocate for the policy positions I am 
professionally obliged or personally committed to represent. However, I 
strive to demonstrate respect and appreciation for the views of those 
with whom I may disagree. I believe in compromise, and I take pride in 
crafting solutions that will accommodate seemingly conflicting points 
of view. Many of those I consider my most valued professional friends 
and associates are also those with whom I have most significantly 
clashed over past policy disputes.
    As for my commitment to service, I view it as a responsibility for 
those who are fortunate to have prospered from professional life in the 
private sector. During the last five years, I have been privileged to 
serve on the staff of the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
Transportation. I joined the Aviation Subcommittee staff in 
anticipation of the major legislative effort required to reauthorize 
the Federal Aviation Administration. I worked collaboratively with the 
bipartisan Senate team throughout the 114th Congress to develop a 
comprehensive FAA Reauthorization bill passed by the Senate in April of 
2016. Subsequent negotiations with the House culminated in passage of 
the FAA Extension, Safety, and Security Act of 2016, passed by Congress 
in July of 2016.
    Efforts to agree on long-term, comprehensive legislation continued 
in the 115th Congress, resulting in passage of the FAA Reauthorization 
Act of 2018, signed into law October 5, 2018. That five-year package 
negotiated on a bipartisan basis ensures long-term stability and 
various important reforms of the FAA. It also reauthorizes and reforms 
the Transportation Security Administration and the National 
Transportation Safety Board.
    I am proud of the major accomplishments to which I have contributed 
since joining the Commerce Committee staff. I would be honored to build 
on that effort through additional service as a member of the National 
Transportation Safety Board.
    21. What do you believe are your responsibilities, if confirmed, to 
ensure that the department/agency has proper management and accounting 
controls, and what experience do you have in managing a large 
organization?
    If confirmed, I will work collaboratively with the Chairman, my 
fellow Board Members, and the staff of NTSB to ensure the limited 
resources available to the agency are targeted efficiently and 
appropriately to fulfill the NTSB's legislative mandate and to achieve 
its priority objectives. As I understand those objectives, they include 
serving as a global leader in conducting independent accident 
investigations, promoting transportation safety through creation of 
relevant materials and products, stakeholder engagement in the 
advancement of transportation safety, and promoting NTSB staff 
involvement and innovation to ensure effectiveness of the agency.
    My experience as an executive for three large entities has prepared 
me well for a leadership role at NTSB. I am familiar .and experienced 
with budgeting and cost control practices, having been responsible for 
developing and managing budgets for the various departments I have lead 
throughout my career. Likewise, I have managed teams involving 
significant numbers of employees, focusing on establishment and 
fulfillment of team objectives, response and adaptation to changing 
circumstances, and growth and development of individual team members.
    I welcome the opportunity to contribute my management experience 
and skills to ensure the continuing success and effectiveness of the 
world's premier transportation safety agency.
    22. What do you believe to be the top three challenges facing the 
department/agency, and why?
    Autonomous vehicles & new technology. Advances in automation and 
the development of autonomous vehicles hold great promise for enhancing 
transportation safety. However, these advances will present new 
questions and challenges--some of which will be difficult to 
anticipate. NTSB must keep pace with the rapid changes. It must ensure 
that staff expertise is maintained and that appropriate tools and 
technical skills are available or developed to meet the challenge.
    Keeping pace with demand. NTSB's reputation as the world's premier 
transportation agency is well deserved. With such a reputation comes 
high expectations, and meeting those expectations in a timely fashion 
is ever more important. The resources available to the agency are 
limited and may become more so. The agency has performed admirably in 
ensuring that resources are targeted effectively. Maintaining that 
discipline will remain essential.
    Maintaining & developing staff. NTSB staff are renowned for their 
skill and expertise. The work of the agency is highly dependent on the 
dedication and unique abilities of its employees. Recruiting and 
retaining skilled team members is a challenge for any government 
agency, and particularly for one such as NTSB which requires such 
unique skillsets. Key to success in this area is ensuring the well-
regarded culture and work environment of the agency is maintained.
                   b. potential conflicts of interest
    1. Describe all financial arrangements, deferred compensation 
agreements, and other continuing dealings with business associates, 
clients, or customers. Please include information related to retirement 
accounts.
    Pursuant to an Executive Change in Control & Severance Benefits 
Agreement with US Airways Group, Inc. & US Airways, Inc., my family and 
I receive lifetime flight privileges on American Airlines.
    I will provide a copy of the Change in Control Agreement for 
review, if needed. Counsel for the Senate Ethics Committee reviewed the 
Agreement in 2014 at the time I joined the staff of the Committee on 
Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
    This information is described fully in my Form 278e Public 
Financial Disclosure Form.
    2. Do you have any commitments or agreements, formal or informal, 
to maintain employment, affiliation, or practice with any business, 
association or other organization during your appointment? If so, 
please explain.
    I have no commitments or agreements to maintain employment, 
affiliation, or practice with any business, association, or other 
organization during my appointment.
    3. Indicate any investments, obligations, liabilities, or other 
relationships which could involve potential conflicts of interest in 
the position to which you have been nominated. Explain how you will 
resolve each potential conflict of interest.
    In connection with the nomination process, I have consulted with 
the Office of Government Ethics and the NTSB's DAEO to identify 
potential conflicts of interest. I agreed to take those actions that 
are outlined in the letter to the DAEO. A copy is attached. These 
commitments constitute my ethics agreement as identified in the ethics 
regulations.
    My family and I receive lifetime flight privileges from American 
Airlines pursuant to an Executive Change in Control & Severance 
Benefits Agreement with US Airways Group, Inc. & US Airways, Inc. 
Because we will continue to receive these benefits, I will not 
participate personally and substantially in any particular matter that 
to my knowledge has a direct and predictable effect on the ability or 
willingness of American Airlines to provide these benefits, unless I 
first obtain a written waiver, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Sec. 208(b)(1). 
Because of this ongoing financial relationship, I will not participate 
personally and substantially in any particular matter involving 
specific parties in which I know American Airlines is a party or 
represents a party, unless I am first authorized to participate, 
pursuant to 5 C.F.R. Sec. 2635.502(d).
    Additionally, I will not participate personally and substantially 
in any particular matter in which I know that I have a financial 
interest directly and predictably affected by the matter, or in which I 
know that a person whose interests are imputed to me has a financial 
interest directly and predictably affected by the matter, unless I 
first obtain a written waiver, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Sec. 208(b)(1), or 
qualify for a regulatory exemption, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. 
Sec. 208(b)(2).
    If I have a managed account or otherwise use the services of an 
investment professional during my appointment, I will ensure that the 
account manager or investment professional obtains my prior approval on 
a case-by-case basis for the purchase of any assets other than cash, 
cash equivalents, investment funds that qualify for the exemption at 5 
C.F.R. Sec. 2640.201(a), obligations of the United States, or municipal 
bonds.
    4. Describe any business relationship, dealing, or financial 
transaction which you have had during the last ten years, whether for 
yourself, on behalf of a client, or acting as an agent, that could in 
any way constitute or result in a possible conflict of interest in the 
position to which you have been nominated. Explain how you will resolve 
each potential conflict of interest.
    In connection with the nomination process, I have consulted with 
the Office of Government Ethics and the National Transportation Safety 
Board's DAEO to identify potential conflicts of interest. I agreed to 
take those actions that are outlined in a letter to the DAEO. A copy is 
attached. These commitments constitute my ethics agreement as 
identified in the ethics regulations. I am not aware of any other 
potential conflicts of interest.
    5. Identify any other potential conflicts of interest, and explain 
how you will resolve each potential conflict of interest.
    In connection with the nomination process, I have consulted with 
the Office of Government Ethics and the NTSB's DAEO to identify 
potential conflicts of interest. Any potential conflicts of interest 
will be resolved in accordance with the terms of an ethics agreement 
that I have entered into with the NTSB's DAEO and that has been 
provided to this Committee. Pursuant to that agreement:

   I will not participate personally and substantially in any 
        particular matter in which I know that I have a financial 
        interest directly and predictably affected by the matter, or in 
        which I know that a person whose interests are imputed to me 
        has a financial interest directly and predictably affected by 
        the matter, unless I first obtain a written waiver, pursuant to 
        18 U.S.C. Sec. 208(b)(1), or qualify for a regulatory 
        exemption, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Sec. 208(b)(2). I understand 
        that the interests of the following persons are imputed to me: 
        my spouse and minor child; any general partner of a partnership 
        in which I am a limited or general partner; any organization in 
        which I serve as officer, director, trustee, general partner or 
        employee; and any person or organization with which I am 
        negotiating or have an arrangement concerning prospective 
        employment.

   My family and I receive lifetime flight privileges from 
        American Airlines pursuant to an Executive Change in Control & 
        Severance Benefits Agreement with US Airways Group, Inc. & US 
        Airways, Inc. Because we will continue to receive these 
        benefits, I will not participate personally and substantially 
        in any particular matter that to my knowledge has a direct and 
        predictable effect on the ability or willingness of American 
        Airlines to provide these benefits, unless I first obtain a 
        written waiver, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Sec. 208(b)(1). Because 
        of this ongoing financial relationship, I will not participate 
        personally and substantially in any particular matter involving 
        specific parties in which I know American Airlines is a party 
        or represents a party, unless I am first authorized to 
        participate, pursuant to 5 C.F.R. Sec. 2635.502(d).

   If have a managed account or otherwise use the services of 
        an investment professional during my appointment, I will ensure 
        that the account manager or investment professional obtains my 
        prior approval on a case-by-case basis for the purchase of any 
        assets other than cash, cash equivalents, investment funds that 
        qualify for the exemption at 5 C.F.R. Sec. 2640.201(a), 
        obligations of the United States, or municipal bonds.

   I will meet in person with the DAEO during the first week of 
        my confirmation in order to complete the ethics briefing 
        required under 5 C.F.R. Sec. 2638.305. Within 90 days of my 
        confirmation, I will document my compliance with the ethics 
        agreement by notifying the NTSB's DAEO in writing when I have 
        completed the steps described in the ethics agreement.

    6. Describe any activity during the past ten years, including the 
names of clients represented, in which you have been engaged for the 
purpose of directly or indirectly influencing the passage, defeat, or 
modification of any legislation or affecting the administration and 
execution of law or public policy.

   Served as Vice President for Government Affairs with US 
        Airways from October 2006 to January 2014.

   Since July 2014, have served continuously as Counsel to the 
        Senate Subcommittee on Aviation & Space (formerly, the 
        Subcommittee on Aviation Operations, Safety, & Security).
                            c. legal matters
    1. Have you ever been disciplined or cited for a breach of ethics, 
professional misconduct, or retaliation by, or been the subject of a 
complaint to, any court, administrative agency, the Office of Special 
Counsel, professional association, disciplinary committee, or other 
professional group? If yes:

  a.  Provide the name of agency, association, committee, or group;

  b.  Provide the date the citation, disciplinary action, complaint, or 
        personnel action was issued or initiated;

  c.  Describe the citation, disciplinary action, complaint, or 
        personnel action;

  d.  Provide the results of the citation, disciplinary action, 
        complaint, or personnel action.

    I have never been disciplined or cited for a breach of ethics, 
professional misconduct, or retaliation, nor have I been the subject of 
any complaints alleging such conduct.
    2. Have you ever been investigated, arrested, charged, or held by 
any Federal, State, or other law enforcement authority of any Federal, 
State, county, or municipal entity, other than for a minor traffic 
offense? If so, please explain.
    I have never been investigated, arrested, charged, or held by any 
law enforcement authority for anything other than for a minor traffic 
offense.
    3. Have you or any business or nonprofit of which you are or were 
an officer ever been involved as a party in an administrative agency 
proceeding, criminal proceeding, or civil litigation? If so, please 
explain.
    I have not personally been a party to or otherwise involved in any 
administrative agency proceeding, criminal proceeding, or civil 
litigation. Each of the private sector organizations which has employed 
me during my professional career was involved in business related 
litigation typical of any large and sophisticated corporate entity. 
While I was often aware of such proceedings, I was never a party in 
interest nor did I actively participate in the litigation.
    4. Have you ever been convicted (including pleas of guilty or nolo 
contendere) of any criminal violation other than a minor traffic 
offense? If so, please explain.
    I have never been convicted of any criminal violation other than a 
minor traffic offense.
    5. Have you ever been accused, formally or informally, of sexual 
harassment or discrimination on the basis of sex, race, religion, or 
any other basis? If so, please explain.
    I have never been accused of sexual harassment or discrimination on 
the basis of sex, race, religion, or any other basis.
    6. Please advise the Committee of any additional information, 
favorable or unfavorable, which you feel should be disclosed in 
connection with your nomination.
    None to report.
                     d. relationship with committee
    1. Will you ensure that your department/agency complies with 
deadlines for information set by congressional committees, and that 
your department/agency endeavors to timely comply with requests for 
information from individual Members of Congress, including requests 
from members in the minority?
    In collaboration with fellow members of the Board, I will ensure 
that NTSB complies with deadlines for information set by congressional 
committees and endeavors to timely comply with requests for information 
from individual Members of Congress, including requests from members in 
the minority.
    2. Will you ensure that your department/agency does whatever it can 
to protect congressional witnesses and whistle blowers from reprisal 
for their testimony and disclosures?
    In collaboration with fellow members of the Board, I will ensure 
that NTSB does whatever it can to protect congressional witnesses and 
whistle blowers from reprisal for their testimony and disclosures.
    3. Will you cooperate in providing the Committee with requested 
witnesses, including technical experts and career employees, with 
firsthand knowledge of matters of interest to the Committee?
    In collaboration with fellow members of the Board, I will cooperate 
in providing the Committee with requested witnesses, including 
technical experts and career employees, with firsthand knowledge of 
matters of interest to the Committee.
    4. Are you willing to appear and testify before any duly 
constituted committee of the Congress on such occasions as you may be 
reasonably requested to do so?
    I am willing to appear and testify before any duly constituted 
committee of the Congress on such occasions as I may be reasonably 
requested to do so.
                                 ______
                                 
                     Resume of 11Thomas B. Chapman
                          PROFESSIONAL HISTORY

Counsel
Senate Subcommittee on Aviation Operations, Safety, & Security
Committee on Commerce, Science, & Transportation
July 2014 to Present.

        Joined Aviation Subcommittee staff in anticipation of 
        legislative effort to reauthorize the Federal Aviation 
        Administration. Worked collaboratively with bipartisan Senate 
        team throughout the 114th Congress to develop comprehensive FAA 
        Reauthorization bill passed by the Senate in April of 2016. 
        Subsequent negotiations with the House culminated in the FAA 
        Extension, Safety, and Security Act of 2016, passed by Congress 
        in July of 2016. Efforts to agree on long-term, comprehensive 
        legislation continued in the 115th Congress, resulting in 
        passage of the FAA Reauthorization Act of 2018, signed into law 
        October 5, 2018. The five-year package negotiated on a 
        bipartisan basis ensures long-term stability and various 
        important reforms of the FAA. It also reauthorizes and reforms 
        the Transportation Security Administration and the National 
        Transportation Safety Board.

Vice President for Government Affairs
US Airways, Washington, D.C.
October 2006 to January 2014.

        Recruited to manage Washington, D.C. office for the ``new'' US 
        Airways. Newly established company resulted from 2005 merger of 
        former US Airways and America West Airlines. Served as primary 
        Washington representative on legislative matters, and 
        contributed significantly to Federal regulatory work and 
        dealing with news media on government affairs matters. During 
        tenure, launched enhanced internal fundraising campaign for US 
        Airways Political Action Committee, doubling the rate of 
        employee participation and tripling PAC financial resources. 
        Heavily involved in developing and implementing government 
        affairs strategies promoting industry consolidation. Work on 
        that company priority culminated in successful agreement to 
        merge US Airways and American Airlines, creating the world's 
        largest airline.

Legislative Counsel
Southwest Airlines Co., Washington, D.C.
January 1998 to October 2006.

        Recruited to establish and manage new Washington, D.C. office 
        to represent highly regarded Southwest Airlines. Establishment 
        of full-time Washington office significantly enhanced the 
        effectiveness of the Company's government affairs efforts. 
        Served as primary Washington representative on legislative and 
        regulatory matters. Frequently called upon to represent the 
        Company in state and local government affairs arena, 
        particularly in the airline's newer east coast destination 
        cities. Helped organize and launch the Company's first ever 
        PAC, the Southwest Airlines Freedom Fund. Dealt with news media 
        on government affairs matters.

Senior Vice President for Government & Technical Affairs
Aircraft Owners & Pilots Association, Washington, D.C.
December 1996 to January 1998.

Promoted to direct all federal, state, and local government affairs 
activities for AOPA--a major national association representing 
interests of over 340,000 members. Managed full-time professional staff 
of eighteen in AOPA's Washington, D.C. and Frederick, Maryland offices. 
Also managed state and local activities of twelve Regional 
Representatives. AOPA's government affairs program often cited as among 
the most active of all national membership associations.

Vice President & Legislative Counsel
Aircraft Owners & Pilots Association, Washington, D.C.
November 1988 to December 1996.

        Promoted to direct Federal and state legislative programs and 
        PAC for AOPA. Managed staff of six in AOPA's Office of 
        Legislative Affairs. During tenure, substantially increased 
        effectiveness and organization of AOPA's legislative programs. 
        Increased PAC fund-raising capability to secure it solidly 
        among 50 largest PACs in the United States.

State Legislative Counsel
Aircraft Owners & Pilots Association, Washington, D.C.
June 1985 to November 1988.

        Promoted to expand and direct AOPA's state legislative program. 
        Coordinated state legislative activities of twelve Regional 
        Representatives.

Associate Counsel, Office of the General Counsel
Aircraft Owners & Pilots Association, Washington, D.C.
May I982 to June I985.

        Established and coordinated successful state legislative 
        program for AOPA. Drafted or reviewed all Association contracts 
        and participated heavily in contract negotiations. Responsible 
        for all trademark and copyright issues. Gained experience in 
        broad spectrum of corporate legal matters.
                               EDUCATION
American University School of Law, Washington, D.C.
Juris Doctor, May 1982.
Admitted to the practice of law in Washington, D.C. and Maryland.

C.W. Post College, Greenvale, N.Y.
Bachelor of Fine Arts in Music, May 1978.
Full participant in Honors Program.
Areas of concentration: political science, literature, and education.
                          PERSONAL INFORMATION
Born December 18, 1954, Denver, Colorado.
Married January 25, 1986, to Mary Scott O'Connell (``Scotty'').
                                 ______
                                 
       Attachment--Question 3--B. Potential Conflicts of Interest
                                                  November 12, 2019
Ms. Kathleen Slaughter
Designated Agency Ethics Official
National Transportation Safety Board
490 L'Enfant Plaza East, SW, Sixth Floor
Washington, DC 20594

                Re: Ethics Agreement--Thomas B. Chapman
Dear Ms. Silbaugh,

    The purpose of this letter is to describe the steps that I will 
take to avoid any actual or apparent conflict of interest in the event 
that I am confirmed for the position of Board Member of the National 
Transportation Safety Board.
    As required by 18 U.S.C. Sec. 208(a), I will not participate 
personally and substantially in any particular matter in which I know 
that I have a financial interest directly and predictably affected by 
the matter, or in which I know that a person whose interests are 
imputed to me has a financial interest directly and predictably 
affected by the matter, unless I first obtain a written waiver, 
pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Sec. 208(b)(1), or qualify for a regulatory 
exemption, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Sec. 208(b)(2). I understand that the 
interests of the following persons are imputed to me: any spouse or 
minor child of mine; any general partner of a partnership in which I am 
a limited or general partner; any organization in which I serve as 
officer, director, trustee, general partner or employee; and any person 
or organization with which I am negotiating or have an arrangement 
concerning prospective employment.
    My family and I receive lifetime flight privileges from American 
Airlines pursuant to an Executive Change in Control & Severance 
Benefits Agreement with US Airways Group, Inc. & US Airways, Inc. 
Because we will continue to receive these benefits, I will not 
participate personally and substantially in any particular matter that 
to my knowledge has a direct and predictable effect on the ability or 
willingness of American Airlines to provide these benefits, unless I 
first obtain a written waiver, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Sec. 208(b)(1). 
Because of this ongoing financial relationship, I will not participate 
personally and substantially in any particular matter involving 
specific parties in which I know American Airlines is a party or 
represents a party, unless I am first authorized to participate, 
pursuant to 5 C.F.R. Sec. 2635.502(d).
    If I have a managed account or otherwise use the services of an 
investment professional during my appointment, I will ensure that the 
account manager or investment professional obtains my prior approval on 
a case-by-case basis for the purchase of any assets other than cash, 
cash equivalents, investment funds that qualify for the exemption at 5 
C.F.R. Sec. 2640.201(a), obligations of the United States, or municipal 
bonds.
    I will meet in person with you during the first week of my service 
in the position of Board Member in order to complete the initial ethics 
briefing required under 5 C.F.R. Sec. 2638.305. Within 90 days of my 
confirmation, I will document my compliance with this ethics agreement 
by notifying you in writing when I have completed the steps described 
in this ethics agreement.
    I have been advised that this ethics agreement will be posted 
publicly, consistent with 5 U.S.C. Sec. 552, on the website of the U.S. 
Office of Government Ethics with ethics agreements of other 
Presidential nominees who file public financial disclosure reports.
    I understand that as an appointee I will be required to sign the 
Ethics Pledge (Exec. Order No. 13770) and that I will be bound by the 
requirements and restrictions therein in addition to the commitments I 
have made in this ethics agreement.
            Sincerely,
                                                  Thomas B. Chapman

    The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Chapman. I am required to ask 
you this question on the record. If confirmed, will you pledge 
to work collaboratively with this Committee and provide 
thorough and timely responses to our request for information as 
we work together to address important policy issues?
    Mr. Chapman. Absolutely, Mr. Chairman, and I will be happy 
to do so.
    The Chairman. Thank you very much. We have been required 
this past year to spend a great deal of time talking about 
aviation safety. Of course, in the U.S. commercial aviation 
continues to be one of the statistically safest forms of 
transportation. What do you think will be the greatest safety 
related challenges facing the aviation system over the next 
decade?
    Mr. Chapman. Mr. Chairman, I think it is not unique to 
aviation. I think automation is the biggest challenge. And it 
is a challenge again as I highlighted in my formal statement 
because automation presents such promise but also presents such 
challenge in terms of managing it and anticipating when things 
can go wrong with automation. We have to make sure that we 
haven't developed too much of an over-reliance on it and that 
we have operators in all modes that are able to respond when 
there is a failure.
    The Chairman. Well, let's transition then specifically to 
UAS, to Unmanned Aircraft Systems, and give us your thoughts on 
some of the safety challenges there.
    Mr. Chapman. I think the key to safe integration of drones 
into the system is promulgation of the remote ID rule. That has 
lagged somewhat. I think all of us on the staff level and 
members as well have been frustrated by that. But I think 
anything that can be done to encourage FAA to move forward on 
promulgation of the remote ID rule as expeditiously as possible 
is in the best interest of safety, also security, and certainly 
is essential to ensure that they can be integrated into the 
existing air traffic control system.
    The Chairman. Mr. Chapman, the Amtrak derailment in Dupont, 
Washington occurred on December 18, 2017. NTSB held its Board 
meeting on the report on May 21 of this year and issued its 
final report on June 24. We've heard from prior nominees that 
accident investigations can take longer than necessary.
    It takes an average of one to two years to complete an 
accident investigation and issue a final report. Given your 
experience in working with this committee and elsewhere, how 
important is it to have NTSB investigation reports issued in a 
timely manner and do you have any recommendations for getting 
these reports done more quickly?
    Mr. Chapman. Mr. Chairman, I agree. First, of all the 
importance of rapid completion of these reports is a priority--
I know for the current Chairman for the current Board members. 
I look forward to working with them. I think candidly, one of 
the challenges that they have faced over the past year was the 
shutdown which I know set them back a little bit, but it is a 
priority at the agency. I look forward to working with my 
colleagues on the Board to ensure that these reports are issued 
in as timely a fashion as possible.
    Obviously investigations need to be thorough and complete, 
but the outcome of these investigations is the product of the 
agency, and it is that product then that drives further 
improvements in safety. So they need to be made available as 
soon as possible.
    The Chairman. Well, I would suggest to you that certainly a 
Government shutdown is a terrible way to run our business, and 
to the extent that we all have our fingerprints somewhat on 
that, that is regrettable, but I do think it is a much larger 
issue and it happens year in and year out. And I would hope 
that as a new member of NTSB you can give some very thorough 
and informed attention to this issue.
    Mr. Chapman. Absolutely, Mr. Chairman, and it should 
definitely be a priority.
    The Chairman. Senator Cantwell.
    Senator Cantwell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chapman, you 
mentioned in response to the Chairman this issue of automation 
and I certainly agree. Whether you are talking about aviation 
or automated vehicles, we have seen recent problems and over-
reliance on technology. What do you think we need to do to 
improve our understanding here particularly on the human 
interface side?
    Mr. Chapman. Well, Senator, frankly I think one of the 
proposals in your recent legislation, the idea of a Centre of 
Excellence for flight automation at least is one of the 
approaches that will be helpful. I think it is essential that 
there be focus not only on the benefits of automation but 
ensuring that there isn't a complacency in terms of the 
operators.
    That to me is a matter of training, to a great extent, 
certainly in modes such as aviation, but it is also a matter of 
designing the systems and I think regulating the systems in 
such a way that the systems themselves have features built into 
them that ensure that there is continuing essentially reminder 
to the operator to maintain vigilance so that this complacency 
doesn't creep in and it doesn't become the cause itself of an 
accident when there is a failure.
    Senator Cantwell. How would you do that on the design side? 
I mean one of the reasons why we have suggested a Centre of 
Excellence on this is because as Captain Sullenberger said, 
``you don't even know what the limitations of human response 
are.'' So if you don't categorize that first, then how are you 
going to determine what their abilities are as it relates to 
reacting to automation?
    So first you have to have some kind of definition of human 
capability and understanding, and then you have to determine 
whether that is--but I am not sure we have that part of our 
design elements yet, whether we are talking about automated 
vehicles or in aviation. So what should we do there?
    Mr. Chapman. I think that is right, and I think research 
through institutions such as a Centre of Excellence and other 
academic institutions helps us better understand and define 
what the limitations are. But then I think as we saw in the 
recent NTSB recommendations coming out of the Lion Air 
accident, we need to test the assumptions that are used with 
respect to, certainly in case of aviation, the certification 
standards that are applied.
    The assumptions in the case of MCAS appear not to have been 
valid assumptions. They are long-standing assumptions, but they 
appear not to have been valid. And then the other thing that 
was not taken into account, and this again has to be done 
across the board, is how will human beings respond when there 
is not an individual failure but multiple failures or a failure 
that triggers cascading alarms or cascading failures? Those are 
difficult challenges and they require research, they require 
experience in order to better understand how to respond.
    Senator Cantwell. Well, and I definitely appreciate in 
NTSB's recommendation on that. I think it was very helpful and 
that is why we put it into legislation because we think it is--
there are many things to do here obviously to upgrade our 
system, but clearly that is one of the things that is very 
clear, both what is the initial response and then how much 
information can you throw at somebody in that kind of 
environment and get some result that you think you are going to 
get.
    One of the other issues kind of following on what the 
Chairman was asking which is, we obviously want in the NTSB is 
to do a thorough investigation. When they do a thorough 
investigation, it often takes a longer period of time. And yet, 
we want those recommendations then to be the basis of making 
improvements to the system. And I know that the NTSB has this 
most wanted list for safety improvements. How do we make 
progress on that?
    Mr. Chapman. The most wanted list, of course, is the most 
important tool that the NTSB has for leveraging its priority 
recommendations. And I know that there has been an effort 
ongoing at the NTSB in recent years to enhance the content, 
enhance the format, but the next step is taking that material 
and doing an effective job of advocating. I think each of the 
members has to take a responsibility, both individually and 
collectively, to get out into the field, to work with 
legislators, to work with Congress, to work with local 
Governments to ensure that these recommendations are 
highlighted, that work is done to implement them.
    And a lot of that frankly is just good old-fashioned elbow 
grease and I think it requires a lot of individual effort on 
the part of the members of the NTSB. It is not a regulatory 
agency. It doesn't have the authority to compel these 
recommendations. I don't believe it should. I think the 
independence of the agency is important and I think the lack of 
authority is part of that independence, but I do think it 
requires a lot of work on the part of the board collectively, 
on the part of the staff, and then on the part of members 
individually to be out into the field and advocating.
    Senator Cantwell. Is there something else besides the most 
wanted list you think would be helpful?
    Mr. Chapman. Well, that is the most important tool. I have 
to be honest, I don't know enough yet about the advocacy role 
of individual members to know what other options there might 
be. I am looking forward to learning more about that because I 
think that is an area where I might be able to help play a 
role. I have been a longtime advocate myself for a number of 
things and I think I have some skills there that might come to 
bear. But I would like to learn more about what can be done and 
what NTSB does today or could be doing in the future to help 
with the advocacy piece.
    Senator Cantwell. Well, I definitely think we need to look 
at what tools are available to us. I also wonder if resources 
to NTSB to look at systemic information across many accidents 
would also help us, and then reminders of open issues and 
resolving those things, I think, or an annual report on open 
issues in response to many of these things. I just--you have a 
very big responsibility and portfolio, so we appreciate the 
attention you would bring to these issues. I wanted if I could, 
Mr. Chairman, since I see that it is here, us, if I could----
    The Chairman. I think you are into your second round, 
Senator Cantwell.
    [Laughter.]
    Senator Cantwell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks. At grade 
crossings are a particular issue. In 2018, the Federal Railroad 
Administration data says there are more than 2,200 collisions, 
262 fatalities, and 840 injuries. These numbers are, you know, 
very similar to previous years. So we just have a lot more 
injuries. We have a lot more activity. We have a lot more 
movement of goods and services. What can we do? What do you 
think we should do to try to improve this particular area of 
transportation safety?
    Mr. Chapman. Senator, this, I will freely admit, is not my 
area of expertise. I am looking forward to learning more from 
some of the other Board members who have greater expertise. I 
have started to do some homework with respect to rail 
especially and also pipeline, two areas that are relatively new 
to me, but I certainly understand the concern here and the 
importance of moving forward on this. And I am looking forward, 
frankly, to learning more about it and doing everything I can 
to see if we can't make improvements.
    Senator Cantwell. Thank you. Well, we definitely would look 
forward to NTSB's comments on that. We think that the 
infrastructure there is--we get that it is challenging, but we 
also think that the infrastructure is lacking to a certain 
degree, so we are not sure if, you know, the issue is putting 
resources on the table to improve the at grade crossings 
themselves or more safety apparatuses for what we existing in 
place.
    But, we will look forward to the comments there as we 
continue to see growth and activity in this area. We just think 
those numbers are going to continue to stay at that very high--
unfortunately very high level unless we make some improvements. 
So, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    The Chairman. Let me add to that, a solution to grade 
crossings is also near and dear to my heart. It is a safety 
issue and also it is a commerce issue to the extent that it 
impedes the efficient flow of goods and services around this 
country. It is something that I want to work with the Ranking 
Member to address. And before we close this hearing, I would be 
remiss, and staff members on both sides of the aisle would 
chastise me, if I did not emphasize the great bipartisan 
relationship that all members of the staff have had with Tom 
Chapman as someone who sat behind us.
    And on behalf of the Committee and the staff that backs us 
up, we thank you for the work that you have done, and we wish 
you the best in your new endeavors.
    Senator Cantwell. Thank you for the service and look 
forward to continue to work with you.
    Mr. Chapman. Thank you for the kind words.
    The Chairman. And I am now required to say, the hearing 
record will remain open for two days. During this time, 
Senators are asked to submit any questions for the record with 
the final submission deadline being the close of business on 
Friday the 13th of December. The Committee asks that witnesses 
that--we ask the witness that you submit your written answers 
to questions for record as soon as possible, but no later than 
close of business on Monday, December 16, 2019.
    With that, we will again thank the nominee, and members, 
and conclude the hearing.
    [Whereupon, at 11:35 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

                            A P P E N D I X

     Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. John Thune to 
                           Thomas B. Chapman
    Question. Mr. Chapman, as you know the NTSB is not a regulatory 
agency, and its investigations and safety recommendations are intended 
to offer continued improvement of transportation safety for the public.
    The NTSB Reauthorization Act, included in last year's FAA 
Reauthorization, required the NTSB to disclose its methodology 
detailing the process and information used in selecting each safety 
recommendation.
    With the understanding that NTSB's safety recommendations are not 
binding, the intent of requiring this methodology is to promote the 
transparent sharing of information, including any external information 
and alternative actions considered in the development of associated 
safety recommendations.
    a. Do you believe it is important for NTSB to provide information 
on its methodology underlying safety recommendations?
    Answer. I agree that it is important for policymakers and those 
receiving NTSB recommendations to fully understand the safety issues 
identified by the agency, as well as the basis for and the intent of 
its recommendations. The ``methodology'' provision included in last 
year's FAA Reauthorization sets forth a structured mechanism which 
should enhance both transparency and understanding.

    b. To follow up on that, how do you believe disclosing this 
information will help decision-makers when considering safety 
recommendations made by NTSB?
    Answer. NTSB's mission is to identify those actions which could 
improve safety. I know from my own experience that some recommendations 
are seen as cost prohibitive or impractical at the time they are made. 
However, such recommendations often encourage innovation and research, 
ultimately resulting in forward looking solutions to safety challenges 
identified because of NTSB's investigative work. Decision-makers will 
benefit from a greater understanding of the agency's perspective, and 
especially when there is an acknowledgment that specific 
recommendations will ``push the envelope.'' In such circumstances, 
decision-makers should be better able to evaluate the cost implications 
and practical feasibility.
                                 ______
                                 
    Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Gary Peters to 
                           Thomas B. Chapman
    Question 1. What improvements or changes would you like to see at 
the NTSB?
    Answer. In my view, the agency is facing at least three key 
challenges:

   Autonomous vehicles & new technology. Advances in automation 
        and the development of autonomous vehicles hold great promise 
        for enhancing transportation safety. However, these advances 
        present new questions and challenges--some of which will be 
        difficult to anticipate. NTSB must keep pace with the rapid 
        changes. It must ensure that staff expertise is maintained and 
        that appropriate tools and technical skills are available or 
        developed to meet the challenge.

   Keeping pace with demand. NTSB's reputation as the world's 
        premier transportation agency is well deserved. With such a 
        reputation comes high expectations, and meeting those 
        expectations in a timely fashion is ever more important. The 
        resources available to the agency are limited and may become 
        more so. NTSB has performed admirably in ensuring that 
        resources are targeted effectively. Maintaining that discipline 
        will remain essential.

   Maintaining & developing staff. NTSB staff are renowned for 
        their skill and expertise. The work of the agency is highly 
        dependent on the dedication and unique abilities of its 
        employees. Recruiting and retaining skilled team members is a 
        challenge for any government agency, and particularly for one 
        such as NTSB which requires such unique skillsets. Key to 
        success in this area is ensuring the well-regarded culture and 
        work environment of the agency is maintained.

    If confirmed, I will work collaboratively with the Chairman, my 
fellow Board Members, and the staff of NTSB to ensure the limited 
resources available to the agency are targeted efficiently and 
appropriately to meet these challenges and to fulfill NTSB's 
legislative mandate.

    Question 2. We have examined in this Committee the many new 
entrants to our national airspace. What concerns do you have about 
emerging technologies and integration of an increasingly crowded 
national airspace?
    Answer. I feel confident that emerging technologies such as drones 
can be safely integrated into our national airspace system. However, a 
key step in that process is promulgation by FAA of the so-called 
``Remote ID'' rule. That initiative has lagged somewhat. FAA should be 
encouraged to move forward with the Remote ID rule as expeditiously as 
possible. Remote ID is essential to ensure the safe integration of 
drones. It will also play an important role in terms of security and 
deployment of effective counter drone measures.

    Question 3. Senator Young and I have introduced legislation to help 
reduce school bus related accidents--associated with children being hit 
by automobiles when getting on or off school buses. Are you familiar 
with this problem--and NTSB's efforts to help address this issue? Do 
you have any thoughts on how NTSB can help address what the data 
indicates is a growing threat to school children?
    Answer. We were reminded of the risks associated with school bus 
loading and unloading by two tragic accidents here in the Washington, 
D.C. region within the past week. I am certainly aware of the problem, 
and I know of NTSB's work in this area. In fact, NTSB staff testified 
on the Federal role in improving school bus safety at a House 
Transportation & Infrastructure Committee hearing last July.
    I commend your efforts to promote school bus safety, and I look 
forward to collaborating with you and Senator Young. If confirmed, I 
will work to support NTSB's investigative and safety advocacy efforts 
in this area.

    Question 4. Senator Ernst and I founded the Motorcycle Caucus in 
the Senate to advocate for and raise awareness about issues facing 
motorcycle riders and manufacturers. One of the biggest challenges for 
motorcyclists is being seen--a big part of which stems from driver 
awareness. Can you talk about your thoughts on the motorcycle safety 
and driver awareness in the context of the NTSB's advocacy role?
    Answer. I am aware that injuries and fatalities resulting from 
motorcycle accidents are a serious and growing problem. Further, I am 
personally familiar with the challenge of ``being seen,'' having been 
an avid bicyclist at an earlier time in my life. If confirmed, I am 
committed to working with fellow Board Members and NTSB staff to 
promote comprehensive solutions that address all facets of the problem.

    Question 5. Echoing Senator Cantwell's comments on grade crossings 
and pipeline safety--there are considerable safety challenges in these 
areas and so I would entreat you to follow up on your commitment to 
more fully examine these issues prior to and if you are confirmed by 
the Senate.
    Answer. In responding to Senator Cantwell's question at the 
hearing, I did not mention an important connection to my own family 
history. My grandfather was killed in a grade crossing accident in the 
early 1950s, a few years before I was born. My mother was still in high 
school at the time. As you would expect, it was a defining experience 
in her life.
    I am less familiar with the challenges associated with pipeline 
safety. However, I have already engaged in the process of educating 
myself in this area. I also look forward to working with NTSB staff and 
current Board Members who have greater expertise regarding pipeline 
safety.
    The commitment I made to Senator Cantwell is sincere and personal. 
I am happy to renew that commitment here. I am motivated to learn more 
about these issues and to do my very best to help address the critical 
safety challenges.

                                 [all]

