
 - UNPACKING THE WHITE HOUSE NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]


                       UNPACKING THE WHITE HOUSE
                    NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY

=======================================================================

                                HEARING

                               BEFORE THE

               SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY, INFORMATION
                 TECHNOLOGY, AND GOVERNMENT INNOVATION

                                 OF THE

                         COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
                           AND ACCOUNTABILITY

                        HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

                    ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

                             FIRST SESSION

                               __________

                             MARCH 23, 2023

                               __________

                           Serial No. 118-12

                               __________

  Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Accountability
  
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]  


                       Available on: govinfo.gov
                         oversight.house.gov or
                             docs.house.gov
                             
                               __________

                                
                    U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE                    
51-668 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2023                    
          
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------                            
                             
               COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY

                    JAMES COMER, Kentucky, Chairman

Jim Jordan, Ohio                     Jamie Raskin, Maryland, Ranking 
Mike Turner, Ohio                        Minority Member
Paul Gosar, Arizona                  Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of 
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina            Columbia
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin            Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Gary Palmer, Alabama                 Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Clay Higgins, Louisiana              Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois
Pete Sessions, Texas                 Ro Khanna, California
Andy Biggs, Arizona                  Kweisi Mfume, Maryland
Nancy Mace, South Carolina           Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York
Jake LaTurner, Kansas                Katie Porter, California
Pat Fallon, Texas                    Cori Bush, Missouri
Byron Donalds, Florida               Shontel Brown, Ohio
Kelly Armstrong, North Dakota        Jimmy Gomez, California
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            Melanie Stansbury, New Mexico
William Timmons, South Carolina      Robert Garcia, California
Tim Burchett, Tennessee              Maxwell Frost, Florida
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Becca Balint, Vermont
Lisa McClain, Michigan               Summer Lee, Pennsylvania
Lauren Boebert, Colorado             Greg Casar, Texas
Russell Fry, South Carolina          Jasmine Crockett, Texas
Anna Paulina Luna, Florida           Dan Goldman, New York
Chuck Edwards, North Carolina        Jared Moskowitz, Florida
Nick Langworthy, New York
Eric Burlison, Missouri

                       Mark Marin, Staff Director
       Jessica Donlon, Deputy Staff Director and General Counsel
             Raj Bharwani, Senior Professional Staff Member
                 Lauren Lombardo, Senior Policy Analyst
                      Peter Warren, Senior Advisor
      Mallory Cogar, Deputy Director of Operations and Chief Clerk

                      Contact Number: 202-225-5074

                  Julie Tagen, Minority Staff Director
                      Contact Number: 202-225-5051
                                 ------                                

 Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Government 
                               Innovation

                 Nancy Mace, South Carolina, Chairwoman
William Timmons, South Carolina      Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia 
Tim Burchett, Tennessee                  Ranking Minority Member
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Ro Khanna, California
Anna Paulina Luna, Florida           Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Chuck Edwards, North Carolina        Kweisi Mfume, Maryland
Nick Langworthy, New York            Jimmy Gomez, California
Eric Burlison, Missouri              Jared Moskowitz, Florida
                         
                         
                         C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

                              ----------                              
                                                                   Page
Hearing held on March 23, 2023...................................     1

                               Witnesses

Ms. Kemba Walden, Acting National Cyber Director, Office of the 
  National Cyber Director
Oral Statement...................................................     5

 Opening statements and the prepared statement for the witness 
  are available in the U.S. House of Representatives Repository 
  at: docs.house.gov.

                           Index of Documents

                              ----------                              

  * Article, Wall Street Journal, ``Wave of Stealthy China 
    Cyberattacks Hits U.S., Private Networks, Google Says''; 
    submitted by Rep. Lynch.

  * Questions for the Record: to Ms. Walden; submitted by Rep. 
  Mace.

  * Questions for the Record: to Ms. Walden; submitted by Rep. 
  Langworthy.

  * Questions for the Record: to Ms. Walden; submitted by Rep. 
  Connolly.

Documents are available at: docs.house.gov.

 
                       UNPACKING THE WHITE HOUSE
                    NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY

                              ----------                              


                        Thursday, March 23, 2023

                        House of Representatives

               Committee on Oversight and Accountability

                       and Government Innovation

                                           Washington, D.C.

    The Subcomittee met, pursuant to notice, at 3:09 p.m., in 
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Nancy Mace 
[Chairwoman of the Subcomittee] presiding.
    Present: Representatives Mace, Timmons, Burchett, Edwards, 
Langworthy, Connolly, and Lynch.
    Ms. Mace. The Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Information 
Technology, and Government Innovation will now come to order. 
Welcome everyone, and good afternoon.
    Without objection, the Chair may declare a recess at any 
time.
    I recognize myself for the purpose of making an opening 
statement.
    Good afternoon, and welcome to this hearing, the 
Subcommittee on Cyber, Information Technology, and Government 
Innovation. Today, we are going to discuss the White House 
National Cybersecurity Strategy, which was issued three weeks 
ago today. The strategy in this Administration's proposal for 
fighting a battle that, as a Nation, we must win. Key aspects 
of our everyday life now rely on the safe flow of data, 
computerized systems, and even AI. That includes the delivery 
of medical care, the conduct of law enforcement activity, the 
operation of utilities, and the smooth flow of ground and air 
transportation, and even critical infrastructure.
    We must be able to trust the integrity of these systems, 
their ability to keep functioning, and to preserve and protect 
the data they use. When these systems fall victim to malicious 
hackers, the costs are enormous. And I don't have to remind our 
witness today, but in December 2020, with SolarWinds, we had 11 
Federal agencies hacked by adversaries aligned with China and 
Russia. In my home state of South Carolina, a few summers ago, 
we saw the Colonial Pipeline hacked, and that is when we saw 
gas prices started to go up, and they really have never come 
back down since then. And so, this is an issue that is--affects 
everybody, whether in the public or the private sector.
    Aside for the enormous costs, these breaches also erode 
trust in key institutions. So, for instance, the Federal 
Government computer systems, holding confidential data of 
millions of Americans, has been compromised by malicious actors 
too many times. As I cited before, and most recently, D.C. 
Health Link, where we have been advised that over 50,000 people 
who use D.C. Health Link in the Federal Government work force, 
had been affected by that particular hack.
    So, this is truly a national security issue. Many of the 
most sophisticated attacks come from abroad and target our 
critical infrastructure. In recent years, foreign hackers from 
China, Russia, and Iran have sought to disrupt our economy and 
society by infiltrating U.S. critical infrastructure systems, 
including airports, telecommunications networks, along with 
Federal and state government systems. I don't think I can open 
up my computer today and look at a news story and not hear 
about another cyberattack on one of our systems or one of our 
government, Federal, or state, or local agencies, that is 
everywhere. It is pervasive, and it is every day. We must have 
reliable safeguards against criminal and unauthorized use of 
data to ensure economic security, our homeland security, and 
our national security. This is going to require intelligent, 
coordinated action at the Federal level.
    To help the executive branch rise to that challenge, two 
years ago, Congress created a new White House office to provide 
coherent direction and coordination to agency-level 
cybersecurity efforts across the Federal Government. That is a 
lot. You have a big shoes to fill, including by spearheading a 
National Cybersecurity Strategy. Prior administrations have 
released similar cybersecurity strategies, but this is really 
the first time it is to be issued since the Office of National 
Cyber Director was created into law.
    We are pleased to have here today the acting head of the 
Office of National Cyber, Director, as our witness today. There 
are many burning questions that I have about implementation of 
the national cybersecurity strategy, so we all look forward to 
hearing from you this afternoon about the strategy document 
itself. I have it right here and discussing, you know, how and 
when the rubber meets the road, on how rhetoric can be 
translated into action either now or hopefully soon and in the 
future. But before I formally introduce our witness, I will 
yield to the Ranking Member Connolly to provide his opening 
remarks, and I yield back.
    Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Thank you for 
having the hearing, and welcome, Ms. Walden, this afternoon.
    Cybersecurity is a defining political, economic, and 
national security challenge for our time. From malicious 
foreign actors' online destabilization and espionage campaigns 
to ransomware incidents that compromise government and private 
sector information technology networks, these attacks have cost 
the United States billions of dollars and countless critical 
strategic disadvantages. In Fiscal Year 2021 alone, U.S. 
Federal agencies, which depend on IT systems to carry out 
operations and protect the essential information, were the 
target of more than 32,500 cybersecurity incidents. In the last 
half of 2022, cyberattacks targeting governments jumped 95 
percent worldwide and cost an average of $2.07 million per 
incident, a 7.25 percent increase from the previous year alone.
    Data breaches also affect the private sector, including 
educational institutions and healthcare centers. In 2022, the 
FBI received almost 801,000 phishing, personal data breach, and 
other complaints representing estimated losses of more than 
$10.2 billion dollars. According to a 2021 survey by research 
firm, AdvisorSmith, 42 percent of small-and medium-sized U.S. 
businesses had experienced a recent data breach--42 percent. 
The estimated average cost totals almost $9.5 million per 
breach, higher than any other country in the world, and 60 
percent of organizations have raised prices on consumers to 
cover those costs. Experts now predict that the annual cost of 
cybercrime will climb to over $10 trillion in the next number 
of years.
    Cyberattacks will eventually hit close to home for 
everybody. For Congress, it was most recently the hack of the 
D.C. Health Link, which operates the healthcare system used by 
most Members of Congress and our staff. Before that, it was the 
2015 OPM data breach that exposed the private information of 
nearly 22 million individuals, including my own personal 
information. Cyber threats are not new, as information security 
has been on the Government Accountability Office's high-risk 
list since 1997.
    For those who are concerned, you are right to be concerned, 
but we cannot just throw up our hands. We must act quickly and 
decisively to secure digital infrastructure, protect the 
integrity and confidentiality of data, and preserve public 
trust in government institutions. I am proud that Democrats in 
this Committee did just that and helped to lead the bipartisan 
fight to establish the Office of the National Cyber Director, 
the ONCD, in FY 2021. The ONCD is required to coordinate the 
whole of government effort to elevate American safety in the 
digital world, including through the development and 
implementation of the National Cybersecurity Strategy. I 
applaud this and look forward to hearing more from our witness 
today.
    Drawing on bipartisan ideas, including those vested in the 
recommendations of the Cyberspace Solarium Commission, the 
Biden-Harris strategy, as presented, is a bold, comprehensive 
plan for government and industry to create a safer digital 
ecosystem for all Americans. Recognizing that cyber threats cut 
through all industries and ignore geographic borders, the plan 
will examine the regulatory landscape to harmonize 
cybersecurity standards across different sectors and around the 
globe. With so much at stake, it is critical that our 
regulatory landscape allow industry to focus on security 
outcomes, not duplicative or nonsensical compliance burdens. We 
also know that if hackers fail to break into one agency system, 
they will seek out vulnerable entry points elsewhere, and they 
do.
    We must address the current patchwork of cyber regulations 
to ensure that cybersecurity protections flow seamlessly and 
efficiently across industries and government. The strategy 
realigns incentives to ensure that Federal Government's 
investments enhance the long-term strength of a cybersecurity 
posture. For example, it harnesses the Federal Government's 
purchasing power to shape market demand for safe and secure 
technologies. Through programs such as the Federal Risk and 
Authorization Management Program, FedRAMP, which this committee 
passed legislation forward that became law, we can bake into a 
product rather than an additional expensive feature.
    Additionally, the strategy redistributes the responsibility 
so that those best positioned to protect the cybersecurity of 
our citizens, schools, hospitals, and small businesses are 
required to take reasonable steps to do so. For example, it 
embraces liability for software companies that fail to use best 
practices or take reasonable precautions to secure their own 
products. If we do not hold bad actors or actors more focused 
on sales than security accountable, we disadvantage responsible 
companies that take time to follow these best practices, and we 
increase systematic risk for our constituents.
    As the Administration works to implement this strategy, 
Congress must provide the funding and clarify the authorities 
needed to ensure its success. As former chair of Government 
Operations Subcommittee and a current Member of this 
Subcomittee, I know it is essential that we invest in 
modernizing our legacy ID systems and recruit and maintain a 
Federal cyber work force for the future.
    The Federal Government must improve its internal practices. 
It must reap the benefits of the latest cybersecurity 
technologies and increase cooperation with the private sector. 
I look forward to understanding how the ONCD will leverage this 
plan and collaborate with other congressionally empowered IT 
and cyber related leaders to promote the kind of accountability 
our critical Federal systems need. With that, I yield back.
    Ms. Mace. Thank you, Mr. Connolly. I am pleased today to 
introduce our witness for the hearing. Ms. Kemba Walden is the 
acting director of the White House Office of National Cyber 
Director. Ms. Walden came to the ONCD from Microsoft, where she 
was the assistant general counsel in the company's Digital 
Crimes Unit. Prior to that experience, Ms. Walden spent a 
decade at the Department of Homeland Security, holding several 
counsel positions, including the Cyber and Infrastructure 
Security Agency. Welcome, Ms. Walden. We are pleased to have 
you this afternoon.
    Pursuant to Committee Rule 9(g), the witness, if you will 
please stand and raise your right hand.
    Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony that you 
are about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing 
but the truth, so help you God?
    Ms. Walden. Aye.
    Ms. Mace. Let the record show the witness answered in the 
affirmative.
    We appreciate you being here today and look forward to your 
testimony and answering some of our questions. Let me remind 
the witness that we have read your written statement, and it 
will be here in full in the hearing record. Please limit your 
oral statement to five minutes today. As a reminder, press the 
button on the microphone in front of you so that it is on, and 
all Members up here can hear you. When you begin to speak, the 
light in front of you will turn green. After four minutes, the 
light will turn yellow. When the red light comes on, your five 
minutes has expired, and we would ask that you try to wrap it 
up at that juncture.
    I recognize Ms. Walden to please begin her opening 
statement.

 STATEMENT OF KEMBA E. WALDEN, ACTING NATIONAL CYBER DIRECTOR, 
                        THE WHITE HOUSE

    Ms. Walden. Thank you. Thank you, Chairwoman Mace, Ranking 
Member Connolly, distinguished Members of the Subcomittee. 
Thank you for the privilege to appear before you today to 
discuss the Biden-Harris Administration's National 
Cybersecurity Strategy. I am eager to share with you how the 
President's strategy will make our digital ecosystem more 
secure and resilient. It builds on two years of the President's 
unprecedented attention on cyber issues as well as the 
resources and valuable leadership provided by Congress and this 
Committee. While my written testimony goes into more detail 
discussing each of the five pillars that make up the document, 
I would like to highlight the framing of the strategy and the 
two fundamental shifts in policy that are woven throughout it.
    As you know well, the magnitude of the threat we face in 
cyberspace is real, but it is important to remember that we 
defend cyberspace not because it is some distant terrain where 
we battle our adversaries. We defend cyberspace because it is 
intertwined into nearly every aspect of our lives. We live in a 
world that is increasingly digitally dependent. Too often we 
are layering new technology onto old systems at the expense of 
security and resilience, and, unfortunately, today, an attack 
on one organization, industry, or state can rapidly spill over 
to other sectors and regions.
    We all remember how the Colonial Pipeline ransomware 
attack, an incident affecting one company, resulted in a gas 
shortage impacting the entire East Coast. It is within these 
circumstances in mind that we crafted the President's National 
Cybersecurity Strategy--strategies or tools. At their most 
basic level, they match our goals where we are trying to go 
with the vision we need to get there.
    In this strategy, our ultimate goal is a digital ecosystem 
that is more defensible, resilient, and aligned with our 
values. ``Defensible'' means we have tipped the advantage from 
attackers to defenders by designing systems where security is 
baked in, not bolted on. ``Resilient'' means that when defenses 
fail, which they sometimes will, the consequences are not 
catastrophic, and recovery is seamless and swift. Cyber 
incidents shouldn't have systemic real-world impacts, and in 
creating these conditions, we can and must seize the 
opportunity to instill America's values.
    The strategy calls for two fundamental shifts in how the 
United States allocates roles, responsibilities, and resources. 
First, we need to rebalance the responsibility for managing 
cyber risk. Today, we tend to devolve responsibility for cyber 
risk downwards. We ask individuals, small businesses, and local 
governments to shoulder a significant burden for defending us 
all. We ask our parents and our kids to be vigilant against 
clicking suspicious links, and we expect school districts to go 
toe-to-toe with transnational criminal organizations, largely 
by themselves. This isn't just unfair, it is ineffective.
    Instead, the biggest, most capable, and best positioned 
actors in our digital ecosystem can and should shoulder a 
greater share of the burden for managing cyber risk and keeping 
us all safe, and that includes the Federal Government. We must 
do a better job of leading by example and defending our own 
systems, something I know is a key priority for this 
Subcommittee, but we expect similar leadership from industry, 
too. Our mantra is every American should be able to benefit 
from cyberspace, but every American should not have the same 
responsibility to keep it secure. Second, our economy and 
society must incentivize investments that make cyberspace more 
resilient and defensible over the long term. Doing that 
requires creating conditions so an entity is faced with 
tradeoffs between easy, but temporary fixes and harder, but 
lasting solutions. They are motivated to choose the latter.
    We need the free market and public programs, alike, 
rewarding security and resilience. That means building a robust 
cyber work force that draws from all parts of society and 
embracing security and resilience by design. A cybersecurity 
job should be in reach for anyone who wants one. These efforts 
also require thoughtful research and development, investments 
in cybersecurity to prepare for revolutionary changes in our 
technology landscape brought by artificial intelligence and 
quantum computing, and working with our allies and partners to 
promote the collaborative stewardship of our digital ecosystem.
    A strategy is only as good as its implementation, and in 
implementing this strategy, the Federal Government will take a 
data-driven approach and will measure investments made, 
progress, and the outcomes and effectiveness of these efforts. 
Closely working with Congress, interagency partners, civil 
society, and the broader cybersecurity community will be key to 
getting this right and ensuring accountability. Work is already 
under way putting this strategy into action.
    In conclusion, the President's strategy lays out how the 
United States will meet these challenges in cyberspace from a 
position of strength, leading in lockstep with our allies, and 
working with partners everywhere who share our vision for a 
brighter digital future. Thank you for the opportunity to 
testify, and I look forward to your questions.
    Ms. Mace. Thank you, Ms. Walden, and we are asking about 
your mics, and I know you have been moving around. We apologize 
for that. I will now recognize myself for five minutes.
    The National Cybersecurity Strategy, it really reads like a 
vision for the Federal Government, but real results, as you 
know, in your work in the private and public sector really 
depend on implementation of a vision or of a strategy. So, will 
you and your office be leading the implementation of the 
strategy, and if not, then who would be doing that? Where do we 
start with the strategy to do the implementation side of it?
    Ms. Walden. Well, thank you, Chairwoman, for that question. 
One of the most exciting parts of the strategy for me is the 
last page where we articulate precisely that ONCD, in 
collaboration with OMB, are going to lead the development of 
this implementation plan. In fact, we have already started that 
work. ONCD was built to do that work. This is a plan that, as 
we articulate in the strategy, will be public, it will be 
developed, it is being developed, in full collaboration with 
all the departments and agencies who are going to be charged 
with certain action items, and with the private sector, and 
with civil society, and with Congress to make sure that the 
strategy realizes the vision that we have laid out. This 
strategy is new and novel in my mind, because we have attempted 
to, where appropriate, place departments and agencies 
responsible for certain action items, and we will build that 
out in the implementation plan.
    Ms. Mace. What do you think, the timeline? I mean, this is 
a big plan, a big strategy, but how long will it take to 
finally get there from point A to point B?
    Ms. Walden. So, we have already started the work. We have 
created an implementation plan working group that we have 
convened other departments and agencies. We have started the 
actual implementation. So, for example, we have started 
crafting our work force awareness and education strategy. That 
is one of the implementation pieces. We have been implementing 
Executive Order 14028, which is that cybersecurity executive 
order putting actual action into place alongside of that or as 
part of that. We have been implementing our Zero Trust 
Architecture Strategy for the Federal enterprise to be more 
secure, layer by layer, piece-application by application. So, 
we have already started the work. We are moving full speed 
ahead. This will be an ever-evolving dynamic process because 
cybersecurity and cyberspace is ever evolving and dynamic, but 
we have already started the work.
    Ms. Mace. And then, on the topic of work force, obviously 
we all agree here we want to build a robust cyber work force 
drawing from all parts of our society. I think everybody up 
here would agree with that. I am working on legislation to try 
to accelerate the hiring of Federal employees in the 
cybersecurity space, and I would look forward to working with 
you and your office on some of the ideas that we have from, you 
know, education to--in the way that we hire as well. But even 
under existing law, the executive branch has tools at its 
disposal it is not necessarily fully utilizing.
    A report based on the findings of Solarium Commission cited 
specific actions the Administration could take now, should take 
now, and it calls for the office to help coordinate some of 
those actions. Your thoughts on that, and is that possible? 
Your thoughts on getting more employees. You know, as we have 
discussed before, we have an ageing work force. We have got 
four times as many people over the age of 60 in a lot of these 
jobs versus under the age of 30, and so at some point those 
individuals will retire. So, just sort of your thoughts. Will 
your office take the wheel and steer the effort to this more 
robust cyber work force?
    Ms. Walden. So, yes, and in partnership with OPM. So, yes, 
we have similar concerns about access to good-paying cyber jobs 
for anybody that wants one, right? We need to be able to 
rethink the barriers that we might have imposed for those entry 
level jobs. We need to broaden the scope for how we bring in 
new employees, and perhaps we don't need people with four-year 
college degrees for----
    Ms. Mace. Hundred percent, yes.
    Ms. Walden. Maybe we look at community colleges. Maybe you 
just look at the digital skills. I have friends who are 
executives in the outside world there who are great at 
researching when they were younger. They have the right digital 
skills in order to be able to enter this work force.
    In terms of the Federal cyber work force, I share a similar 
concern. And so, we are working with OPM to shore up and 
harmonize the differing Federal authorities across departments 
and agencies for hiring and retaining talent in this space. We 
are working with OPM to develop a legislative proposal, so, I 
would love the opportunity to work with you on those 
initiatives. But the idea is to make sure that we are not 
putting up or imposing barriers to recruitment and that we are 
also putting in incentives for retention.
    Ms. Mace. Thank you, and I wish you the best of luck with 
the Director of OPM. We had her here two weeks ago. She was the 
worst witness our Committee has ever had in the two-plus years 
that I have been here. And so, I have much greater confidence 
in you and your leadership and hope like hell that you can pull 
that off with--because she really couldn't answer any of our 
questions about even workforce issues. So, I really hope and 
pray that you will be able to work with her, and she will be 
able to work with you, and us, too, to expedite getting Federal 
employees into our cyber workforce. So, thank you, and I yield 
back.
    I will now recognize the Ranking Member Connolly for five 
minutes.
    Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Ms. Walden, if I 
could pick up a little bit on where Ms. Mace was, OK? We are 
looking at tens of thousands of positions in IT in the Federal 
Government and cyber as a subset of that, for sure. Given the 
age cohort of the Federal Government, right, we are looking at 
serious numbers of retirements over the next five years. So, 
how proactively--I mean you talked about removing barriers and 
working with OPM, but how do we proactively persuade, you know, 
the millennial generation `you want to come work for the 
Federal Government, and we see a 30-year career in your 
future.' How do you do that? Do you go to college campuses, and 
how do we make Federal services attractive in the sphere when 
the private sector alternative is glaringly seductive in terms 
of compensation and benefits and everything else?
    Ms. Walden. Well, thank you for that question, 
Representative Connolly. I personally do go to college 
campuses. I go to high schools. I even teach cybersecurity 
badge in my daughter's Girl Scout's troop. The pipeline is a 
serious part of our focus in the work force strategy. That is 
why we call it the work force and education strategy. We really 
need to not only focus on the core cyber and IT jobs and how we 
fill that, but the pipeline. So, in my experience, you cannot 
imagine yourself in a particular career unless you see yourself 
in that career. So, it is important to me, for example, to make 
sure that I am out there in front, motivating people to 
consider this.
    So, a couple of thoughts about this. One, the thing that 
draws me in and out of the private sector and into the 
government is mission. Private sector cannot compete with the 
government on mission, and, quite frankly, the government 
cannot compete with the private sector on pay. We can do 
better, and that is one of the opportunities we are looking at 
in this new legislative proposal, being flexible and how we do 
pay. But what we really offer is mission as a sense of moral 
enlightenment, in many ways. So, yes, reaching out, reaching to 
rural areas of the United States, reaching into parents to have 
parents understand the benefits of a career in cyber, and 
parents are and should be one of the primary influencers of 
their children. That is a constituency that I like to reach. 
But it is really the mission that is the secret sauce here.
    Mr. Connolly. Well, thank you. I will commend you. We have 
seen, for example, the excitement generated in high schools 
with robotics competition teams. The excitement is incredible, 
and I remember that some of our intelligence agencies actually 
sponsored cyber competitions. And so, we may want to think more 
about expanding that kind of program to get into high schools 
and get in people's heads this might be something you might 
want to pursue, including in Federal service.
    Let me talk about the National Strategy. I mean, candidly, 
the National Strategy took a little while to get together. Now, 
granted, we were in a pandemic, and we have lots of other 
competing things, but cyber is not a new topic. The OPM breach 
occurred two administrations ago, affecting 22 million current 
and retired Federal employees, and so, it comes to us a little 
bit late. And I guess I am worried about implementation because 
we talk about a whole-of-government approach. Knowing the 
Federal Government, this Subcomittee and its predecessor have 
spent a lot of time looking at Federal agencies, the diversity 
of capability, the diversity of expertise, the diversity of 
proactive strategies to protect, you know, the jewels in a 
given agency is very variable. So, how are you going to have a 
whole-of-government approach that guarantees all Federal 
agencies, whether you are in intelligence or you are in 
education, are protected and that are proactively fending off 
and maybe even proactively attacking the bad guys?
    Ms. Walden. What I can guarantee is that we are, as a whole 
of government, proactive in making sure that our systems are 
resilient. I feel the same urgency. I feel that we are moving 
like a bullet train in this space. There is a sense of urgency 
here. We want to get it right, though, so we have all of the 
departments and agencies working with us. We work by, with, and 
through them. We need mostly consensus to make sure that this 
moves forward in a deliberate, thoughtful, but expedient way, 
so I share that. That is why we were designed the way that we 
are as ONCD. So, we have been implementing, we have been 
working for the last two years on shoring up our cybersecurity 
resilience. I see my time is up.
    Mr. Connolly. Let me just say, because I know the 
Chairwoman shares my concern in this regard, I think you have 
got your work cut out for you.
    Ms. Walden. I do.
    Mr. Connolly. And it is an across-the-board kind of thing. 
It is the IT we possess, the legacy systems that need to be 
retired. It is the encryption that hasn't happened or hasn't 
been updated. It is the personnel as the Chair pointed out, I 
mean, that the age gap between us and the private sector is 
phenomenal. And so, you know, I just think you have got limited 
resources, and your ability to try to have a cohesive strategy 
that affects everybody and protects everybody is going to be, 
well, I hope not a Sisyphean task. I am sorry, Madam 
Chairwoman. Thank you.
    Ms. Mace. You are good. And it will be some of the Federal 
employees that won't want to go along with the national 
strategy that is, as you said, it is preeminent. It is deeply 
important. I would now like to recognize Representative Timmons 
for five minutes.
    Mr. Timmons. Thank you, Madam Chair. The National Cyber 
Strategy was expected to be released last fall. Was that delay 
a reflection of how difficult it is to get the various 
interested parties on the same page, or were there other 
challenges?
    Ms. Walden. You know, it was a bureaucratic process 
intentionally so that we can make sure that everybody, every 
department and agency, saw themselves in the strategy and are 
ready to implement. So, that was just a necessary step that had 
to take place in order to make sure that it is successful.
    Mr. Timmons. Sure. So, next question. U.S. businesses, no 
matter how hard they try to have the best cybersecurity 
possible, can still fall victim to nation-state attacks, and 
those attacks can often cost billions of dollars to publicly 
traded companies.
    Mr. Timmons. Do you think that the Federal Government has a 
role in backstopping those businesses? Since, assuming they are 
doing everything possible to avoid an attack, it is just not 
possible to stand up to nation-state actors. What are your 
thoughts on that?
    Ms. Walden. So, I will start by saying that the cyberspace 
is a global commons. It is a public good. So, the U.S. 
Government has a responsibility and a duty to make sure that it 
is safe, while the private sector pretty much owns and controls 
most of the infrastructure that underlines cyberspace. So, we 
have to work together.
    So, my response to your specific question about small and 
medium businesses, one of the core tenants of the cybersecurity 
strategy is to make sure that those small and medium businesses 
don't bear the significant brunt of cybersecurity risk all on 
their own. So, all of the tools in the strategy are there to 
lift and shift that risk, while also making the infrastructure 
cyberspace more resilient. You talked about backstopping. That 
is indeed one of the tools that we are considering, so cyber 
insurance backstop. Think of flood insurance, for example, in 
order to make sure that cybersecurity, small and medium 
businesses, don't bear the full cost of a cybersecurity breach 
while we are also working on making sure that the systems are 
resilient.
    Mr. Timmons. Sure. Thank you for that. So, let us talk 
about ICANN. The original intent was to promote the stability 
and security of the internet by creating a transparent multi-
stakeholder governance model for the management of domain name 
system. So, in 2016, Department of Commerce, their role in 
ICANN expired. Do you have concerns over that, in the U.S.' 
leadership in maintaining a secure internet globally?
    Ms. Walden. So, I think we need to consider how do we 
harmonize standards. Digital ecosystem is--doesn't have 
specific borders, so we need to make sure that we harmonize 
standards in general, but let me just even take it a step 
further back. Cyberspace is composed of three pieces. We have 
touched a lot on personnel, people, which is arguably the most 
important part of cyberspace, but it is also technology, the 
gizmos, the microphone that has an echo, all of that, right? 
But it is also governance, it is authorities and 
responsibilities. If no one is guarding the gate, then the bad 
guy can just walk through. It is that governance layer that you 
are getting at.
    So, yes, the cybersecurity strategy, generally, is intended 
to articulate and find vulnerabilities in that governance 
layer, in the roles and responsibilities, figure out who is 
guarding the gates, figure out what the vulnerabilities are, 
and then close those vulnerabilities. So, that is a symptom of 
the challenge that we face.
    Mr. Timmons. To that point, what tools does the 
Administration plan to use to bolster the security of the 
foundation itself?
    Ms. Walden. So, there are a couple of tools as articulated 
in the strategy. I think it is Pillar 4 we talk about the 
technical opportunities in the foundations of the internet, 
right, like a faster migration to IPv6 from IPv4. That is one 
opportunity in terms of modernizing the backbone of the 
internet. But then there are also opportunities for filling 
those vulnerabilities, like I described, in the roles and 
responsibilities. The implementation plan is going to help us 
with that, at least in the departments and agencies. We are 
also looking at the idea of harmonizing standards, harmonizing 
regulations so that we know exactly what we are certifying to 
when we have like IoT device labeling, for example, how that 
works across borders, we collaborate with our allies. Pillar 5 
talks about that. So, that is that roles and responsibilities 
piece that relates to the backbone of the internet.
    Mr. Timmons. Sure. Thank you for being here today. Madam 
Chair, I yield back.
    Mr. Connolly. Madam Chairwoman, I just want to welcome to 
the Subcommittee the former Chairman of our full Committee and 
my predecessor in this seat in the 11th District, Virginia, the 
Honorable Thomas Davis. Welcome, Tom.
    Ms. Mace. Thank you for joining us, sir. I would now like 
to recognize Representative--I turned my mic off for you--
Burchett for five minutes.
    Mr. Burchett. Thank you, Chairlady. You mentioned when we 
first started this that she doubted that I could spell AI, but 
I can assure you I can now. I have researched it. I Googled it. 
Ma'am, Chinese-owned media application, TikTok, has over 150 
million active users in the U.S. Do you feel like this is a 
national security concern?
    Ms. Walden. Yes.
    Mr. Burchett. Another question. What countries do you think 
are the biggest threats to national cybersecurity?
    Ms. Walden. Well, as articulated in the worldwide threats 
report that ODNI published, it is China, North Korea, Iran, and 
Russia.
    Mr. Burchett. All right. 1,600 offshore oil and gas 
facilities faces significant risk of cyberattacks. What do you 
think the potential impact of a successful cyberattack on these 
facilities is, and what steps is your office taking to secure 
this infrastructure?
    Ms. Walden. Please excuse me, I did not hear the very 
beginning of that question.
    Mr. Burchett. I said six. OK. Yes, ma'am. I am sorry. I am 
from East Tennessee. It is the only place in the country where 
people do not speak with an accent.
    Mr. Connolly.
    [Laugh]
    Mr. Burchett. Thank you, Connolly. I appreciate it. 1,600 
offshore oil and gas facilities faces significant risk of 
cyberattacks. What is the potential impact of a successful 
cyberattack on these facilities, and what is your office doing 
to secure this valuable infrastructure?
    Ms. Walden. Well, let me start with Pillar 1 of our 
National Cybersecurity Strategy, which is focused clearly on 
critical infrastructure security. There are several tools that 
we have identified in that pillar for making sure that we make 
our critical infrastructure more defensible, while also making 
investments in making sure that it is resilient regardless of 
the attacker or the type of attack. One of those opportunities 
is raising baseline cybersecurity requirements across all 
critical infrastructure sectors. There are many ways to do it, 
but as we do that, we need to make sure that no one, particular 
sector is overregulated so that we encourage investment in 
raising baseline cybersecurity requirements rather than 
investing in compliance. Now, with respect to the offshore oil 
rig, I would love to give you a reaction to that question, but 
I would need to research what the exposure is and----
    Mr. Burchett. Please do. It has been recently reported, and 
I have been informed that that is a major issue, and I can 
assure you that if our enemies can turn that spigot off, they 
will.
    Ms. Walden. Yes.
    Mr. Burchett. And they will not do it in an environmentally 
sound manner either. If somebody could get with me from your 
office, that would be great.
    Ms. Walden. Absolutely.
    Mr. Burchett. From the cybersecurity perspective, ma'am, 
how can we better secure our global financial institutions from 
bad actors? I am always afraid they are going to turn the 
switch. In early days of eBay, they always said make sure you 
use PayPal. Everybody thought it was a racket, and it is a 
racket, but it is their racket, so it is just the deal. But 
then they would say, you know, you get wired money, and it was 
always some kind of lame deal, and people were always getting 
ripped off.
    Ms. Walden. So, there are several opportunities. First, I 
would like to say about the financial services sector that they 
are quite mature in their cybersecurity practices. Of course, 
more work can always be done. As cybersecurity threat actors 
are always evolving and improving, so can our defenses, and so 
can our resilience, so it is an evolution. We work closely with 
the financial sector. We work closely with the Department of 
Treasury. So, for example, we have recently done exercises with 
the Department of Treasury for how do we make sure that our 
financial services sector becomes more resilient?
    Mr. Burchett. Let me get to one more because I am running 
out of time.
    Ms. Walden. OK.
    Mr. Burchett. This is really important to me. Our senior 
citizens, they seem like they are on the radar for a lot of 
these dirtbags that prey upon them. And what steps can your 
office do to work with us to ensure that these folks are 
protected from these hostile foreign actors and groups?
    Ms. Walden. My mom might hate me saying this on live C-
SPAN, but I have got a mom who might be classified as a senior 
citizen, and it concerns me every time she does online banking.
    Mr. Burchett. Mama had a Sunday school class and they 
called them ``seasoned.''
    Ms. Walden. I like it.
    Mr. Burchett. Well, she said, I did not like that, honey. 
It makes it sound like a bunch of cannibals, so my mama was a 
pretty cool lady. But go ahead, I am sorry.
    Ms. Walden. No, but we need to make sure that all of the 
technology, all of the devices that we have, need security 
built in, right? We need to make that commercial where there is 
an easy button. That is what I envision when I am envisioning 
security built in for senior citizens. They should be able to 
turn on their computer, login is already enabled by default, 
multi-factor authentication is already enabled by default. All 
the different security options that you can take should be 
enabled by default. Security has to be built in.
    Mr. Burchett. And I know we are out of time, but a recent 
former Director of the FBI got ripped off on one of these 
deals. And they went after them and got his money back, and I 
was glad they did that. But I was ticked off because I have had 
people that the FBI just gives me lip service, and if they 
could do it for one, they can do it for all of them, and 
dadgummit, they need to start doing it. So, thank you, ma'am.
    Ms. Mace. Thank you, Mr. Burchett.
    Mr. Burchett. I am sorry. I went out of time.
    Ms. Mace. Are you yielding back?
    Mr. Burchett. Do what?
    Ms. Mace. Are you yielding back?
    Mr. Burchett. Yes, ma'am, I yield----
    Ms. Mace. Yes, you are. Yes, you are.
    Mr. Burchett [continuing]. None of my time back.
    Ms. Mace. All right. I would now like to recognize 
Representative Langworthy for five minutes.
    Mr. Langworthy. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Ms. Walden, I 
just want to thank you for being here today and providing this 
Subcommittee with the invaluable insight on the path forward in 
the cybersecurity sector.
    So, I would like to start off by looking at cloud service 
providers. And the strategy correctly notes that cloud-based 
services enable better and more economical cybersecurity 
practices at scale, and their security is crucial for critical 
infrastructure in government systems. However, the strategy 
also is looking to close gaps in regulatory authorities for 
cloud services. Now, I am concerned that this categorical 
effort to sweep in an all cloud-based services is inconsistent 
with a risk-based approach. Can you explain the rationale for 
the blanket approach that you plan to pursue?
    Ms. Walden. So, cloud service providers provide some 
cybersecurity risk protections, particularly for small and 
medium businesses, and even for large enterprises, so let us 
start there. The cloud service providers operate in a highly 
regulated environment as it is. They are a participant in all 
of the regulations that their customers bear. Wouldn't it be 
fantastic if we had harmonized system regulations so that those 
that are highly regulated and that cloud service providers 
provide the compliance for, equal--and we reward that 
investment and cause others to invest in cybersecurity best 
practices by looking at how they are regulated. But cloud 
services providers have publicly acknowledged--we have worked 
with them directly in developing the strategy, but they have 
publicly acknowledged the need for regulatory minimum 
cybersecurity requirements baselines to be brought up and for 
harmonization to take place.
    So, cloud service providers, cloud environments are more 
secure than on-prem, but there is some work still to be done. 
And we are ready, willing, and able to work directly with cloud 
service providers, not necessarily to kowtow to their demands, 
but to make sure that we have effective harmonization across 
all sectors for these purposes of making cloud services more 
secure.
    Mr. Langworthy. You spoke in an interview recently saying 
that of cloud services, that if they were disrupted, they could 
create large and potentially catastrophic disruptions to our 
economy and to our government. Can you talk a little bit about 
this? You had mentioned how cyber criminals in malign foreign 
countries disrupt cloud services.
    Ms. Walden. So, cyber criminals will typically spin up 
infrastructure using cloud services to do so. I was part of a 
team that would find that infrastructure and use all means 
appropriate to tear it down. I think that we can do that at 
scale. We need to be able to work with cloud service providers 
to remove infrastructure, or at least to harden infrastructure, 
so that cyber criminals cannot leverage it. Of course, there 
are other opportunities for making sure that we reduce or we 
increase the cost of cybercrime. We can arrest people. We can 
lean into our authorities more. But we also need to work with 
private sector, owners and operators of managed service 
providers, and cloud service providers to tear down 
infrastructure where infrastructure is being used by 
cybercriminals.
    Mr. Langworthy. OK. Now, the Stafford Act, generally 
speaking, is an all-encompassing document for disasters in the 
United States. A largescale cyberattack could plausibly be 
considered a disaster. However, cyber-related disasters are not 
mentioned in the Stafford Act. What would our strategy be in 
case of a large-scale attack?
    Ms. Walden. This is the reason why we have designed the 
strategy the way that we have. We need to make sure that we 
have our ducks in a row so that we make it more defensible. But 
the focus really needs to be on what investments do we need to 
make in order to make sure that cyberattacks are not 
catastrophic and do not cause systemic failure or long-term 
failure, that we have shorter downtimes. We have a seamless 
response. So, that is the reason why we have the Cybersecurity 
Strategy. On your specific questions about the Stafford Act, I 
would be happy to come back to you with some thoughts about 
that, but that is the reason why we have the strategy the way 
it is.
    Mr. Langworthy. Thank you very much.
    Mr. Langworthy. And I yield back, Madam Chair.
    Ms. Mace. Thank you. I would now like to recognize 
Representative Edwards for your five minutes.
    Mr. Edwards. Thank you, Madam Chair. Ms. Walden, thanks for 
being with us. As I sit here and read your testimony and listen 
to your responses, I cannot think of a less enviable position 
than yours. We are certainly appreciative of you taking this 
on. I served on a bank board for a number of years, and I knew 
the thing that kept us awake most at night was the chance of a 
cyber threat, and you have got a whole country to look out for. 
Can you see any, at this time, I do not want to talk about the 
plan so much, I want to talk about right now. Can you see any 
coordinated efforts from foreign governments right now to hack 
into systems in the United States, or are the threats out there 
from universities or just ne'er-do-wells or that sort of thing?
    Ms. Walden. Thank you for that question. What I can say is 
that the Worldwide Threats Report that was published by ODNI is 
the preeminent description of cyber threats and nation-state 
actors. That is not classified. I would refer you to that, and 
I agree with everything that is in that report. If you are 
asking me about specifics, that might get into classified 
nature of a conversation, and I am not prepared to do that 
today.
    Mr. Edwards. I respect that. Thanks. How do you coordinate 
with the private sector? We have all seen examples of how they, 
too, are under attack, and your responsibility is vast. How do 
you include the private sector?
    Ms. Walden. You know, you can always just pick up the phone 
and call. So, there are opportunities, right? ONCD, my office, 
collaborated with the private sector in a robust way in a 
development of the strategy. We are not an operational office. 
We are, by design, a strategic policymaking office, but 
operationally, there are several different models. We need to 
meet the private sector where they are. We have recognized that 
we need proactive operational collaboration, and this is 
different than information sharing when I left government the 
last time. So, it is exciting for me to see how we are doing it 
now.
    So, for example, CISA runs the Joint Cyber Defense 
Collaborative, known as the JCDC. It is a model where different 
private sector entities are able to come together, exchange 
ideas, exchange information with CISA, with each other. And 
there are other models like the National Security Agency's 
Cyber Collaboration Center, the CCC, which does cyber 
information sharing with their defense industrial base, maybe 
one-on-one, in a classified nature, however it is. But we need 
to meet the private sector where they are. We need to find 
opportunities to identify problems together, come up with 
solutions and operational plans for mitigating that problem 
together, and then executing and deploying that solution 
together.
    Good example, one that makes me really excited and I think 
is a pivotal moment that really did inform the strategy, was 
that on the eve of, or the weeks leading up to the Russian 
invasion of Ukraine, we collectively, we the government, 
collectively figured out that we had intelligence that the 
private sector may not have. Understanding, particularly in the 
financial sector, that if we sanction Russia, that there might 
be some retaliatory effects on the financial sector here at 
home, that there is more that could be done with the 
intelligence that we had by those that actually operate and 
control the infrastructure in the financial services sector. We 
delivered that intelligence so that they can take action. We 
worked the intelligence. We worked the action together. And I 
would like to think that that is a success story. We did not 
see any retaliatory effect on the financial services sector.
    Mr. Edwards. I am running out of time, but a question that 
has been burning on my mind for years, we have heard of this 
threat that maybe computers, PCs that we buy through foreign 
entities that may come from China, Korea, the chips may contain 
in their bias, some sort of code that is sniffing out activity 
here in the U.S. and just ready to be called whenever the 
foreign entity decides. Are you aware of that? Is that actually 
happening? Has it happened?
    Ms. Walden. Well, I would like to point you to the 
strategy, and perhaps you might understand why the strategy 
talks about understanding the supply chain implications of 
chips manufacturing. That is partly what the CHIPS and Science 
Act is intended to mitigate, any opportunity like that, 
hypothetically, could happen like that. Wouldn't it be nice if 
we understood what was in our software, right, what code 
libraries were in our software and how they were assembled? 
Wouldn't it be nice if we could make sure that the final 
assemblers, for example, of software, were held liable for what 
is in it so that it is not buggy, or, and it does not have some 
nefarious code written into it.
    That is one of the most intriguing parts of the National 
Cybersecurity Strategy, from my perspective, is how do we make 
sure that software is built with security in mind. How do we 
make sure that market focuses on securing the market rather 
than first to market? What are the incentives that we need to 
shift in order to make sure that that hypothetical situation 
does not happen?
    Mr. Edwards. Thank you. Madam Chair, I yield.
    Ms. Mace. Thank you. I am going to do one more quick round 
of questions. I may be the only one with questions, and then we 
are going to close it out, if that would be OK to the Ranking 
Member. I am going to recognize myself for five minutes and 
hopefully less than that.
    One of my burning questions is on legacy systems. So, Y2K, 
I was learning COBOL, C++, we called it. COBOL was legacy back 
then in the late 1990's and early 2000's, and it is sort of 
shocking to me to see how many systems that we have that are 
still legacy today. So, for example, there is a 46-year-old 
Department of Education System handling 20 million student 
financial aid applications annually, running on COBOL. There is 
a 50-year-old HHS system supporting clinical and patient admin 
activities coded in C++. I mean, so the list goes on and on of 
all of these examples of these legacy systems. So you know, 
your thoughts on--the Government Accountability Office has 
pointed this out repeatedly--we need these upgrades. We have 
needed it for decades. How does the strategy play into getting 
this done across the board?
    Ms. Walden. You know, IT modernization is part of the story 
here. It has to happen. We cannot have 50-year-old systems.
    Ms. Mace. It has to happen.
    Ms. Walden. It has to happen.
    Ms. Mace. I mean, there is--yes.
    Ms. Walden. But it has to happen in a way that is smart and 
thoughtful, but it has to happen. There is some urgency behind 
it. We have already started working on that process.
    Ms. Mace. What about the agencies and Federal employees 
that are dragging their feet on some of this? I mean, we have 
seen, like, at the VA right now, EHR, I mean, just taking over 
a decade to do something that really should not take as long as 
it is. How do we get them to come along with this?
    Ms. Walden. Well, I would love to take that particular 
question back about the VA and give you a detailed answer.
    Ms. Mace. Yes.
    Ms. Walden. But I share your urgency. I am 51.
    Ms. Mace. And a lot of examples.
    Ms. Walden. Yes.
    Ms. Mace. I will not go into all of it. But the other quick 
thing I wanted to ask about, and you have talked about this, 
too. Our first hearing was on AI in this committee, and there 
are things that we cannot even imagine how AI will be used. I 
read a story the other day about ChatGPT getting through 
CAPTCHA, like, with a TaskRabbit employee, and told them that 
they were visually impaired, to break into that. We cannot even 
imagine how it might be used for good and then also for bad, 
which is one of my concerns. How are we going to use some of 
these tools to ensure that we defend ourselves against breaches 
that we cannot even be aware of right now? Where is AI? I know 
it is mentioned in the plan, but where do you see AI in the 
overall strategy?
    Ms. Walden. So, it is mentioned in the strategy, but I 
think our first conversation was around AI at some point, and 
so, I have been giving this some thought. I think of AI and the 
cybersecurity pieces of it in three buckets, right? Data that 
fuels AI, the compute power for AI, and the algorithms. There 
are cybersecurity components of each piece of that, that we can 
use to not only shore it up so that it is not used for 
nefarious purposes, or at least we reduce the chances of it 
being used for nefarious purposes, but we can also use it for 
the benefit of security, right?
    So, I am thinking in terms of data. I am thinking through 
data security measures, thinking through cryptography. How do 
we do data analytics without decrypting? Thinking about compute 
power and the work we are doing right now, as articulated in 
the strategy, on quantum is all about compute power. The work 
that we are doing on chip supply chain the gentleman here 
raised, it is all about compute power. And then the algorithms, 
how do we think about that? So, we are purposefully thinking 
through how to make sure that AI, the cybersecurity elements of 
AI, are used for good purposes, and that we are reducing the 
likelihood of----
    Ms. Mace. We do not want China to eat our lunch or Russia, 
or Iran, or any of that.
    Ms. Walden. Absolutely.
    Ms. Mace. My last question is part of the strategy 
contemplates more regulation, but from your lips, God's lips to 
my ears, you said you did not want to overregulate. So, thank 
you for making that statement, much appreciated because I think 
that we could stifle innovation by overregulating. But in terms 
of regulation, that framework, who is going to coordinate the 
cybersecurity regulatory regime and then also de-conflict when 
that is necessary?
    Ms. Walden. Well, we do have language, and not in this 
strategy, offering that ONCD in collaboration with OMB will 
lead a regulatory harmonization taskforce, for example, where 
we will think through precisely what are the gaps, what are the 
regulations, what are the authorities that exists now that we 
are underutilizing for regulatory purposes of cybersecurity. 
How do we fill any gaps that might exist? But most importantly, 
you and I agree, that we need to harmonize so that we make sure 
that we incentivize investment in cybersecurity requirements 
and not compliance, which some sectors are doing right now.
    And so, that is an all-of-department and--agency effort. We 
would love to have a task force that does that work. We are 
already working on that. We work on that through the CIRC, the 
Cyber Incident Response Council, and CIRCIA. We are working on 
that with independent agencies in terms of thinking through how 
do we harmonize the regulations that independent agencies are 
imposing, but there is more work to be done.
    Ms. Mace. Thank you. And I would now like to recognize 
Representative Lynch for five minutes.
    Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Madam Chair, and I thank the Ranking 
Member for holding this hearing, and I want to welcome Ms. 
Walden for giving her testimony and helping the committee with 
this work.
    Ms. Walden, the Administration's National Cybersecurity 
Strategy represents, I think, an important step in our response 
as a Nation in dealing with the cyber threat landscape. We know 
that autocratic and oppressive governments like Russia and 
China are not only operating full spectrum surveillance of 
their own citizens, but we also know that they are taking 
advantage of the freedoms that we have in our country by 
surveilling our personnel, our citizens as well. And they are 
leveraging espionage, influence campaigns, ransomware, critical 
infrastructure attacks, and emerging technologies to pursue all 
those goals.
    Your strategy, as I read it, mentions ``the dark vision for 
the future of the internet that the People's Republic of China 
and other autocratic governments,'' I presume, Russia, what 
``those regimes promote.'' Can you sort of flesh that out a 
little bit and talk about what does that look like, the dark 
vision that Russia and China present in terms of our future on 
the internet?
    Ms. Walden. So, the way I think about the internet, is that 
it carries our values. It carries the values of those that 
design and build it. We have democratic values here. We need to 
lead and lean into that as we think about the future resilience 
of internet. We cannot allow autocratic societies like China, 
like Russia, to set our agenda to have internet, to have a 
cyberspace that we envision in the document that we presented 
here today. That is the idea. That is the big idea in this 
strategy is that we need to set what we think the future of 
cyberspace is. We need to invest in that future of cyberspace, 
and that is the resilience piece of it, rebalancing the risk 
piece of it. But we cannot let China, Russia, et cetera, et 
cetera, set our agenda. We are getting really great at 
defending against, but wouldn't it be great if we got in front 
of? That is a better opportunity from my perspective.
    Mr. Lynch. Absolutely.
    Ms. Walden. That is what we mean.
    Mr. Lynch. OK. In some ways, and in frightening ways, this 
dark future that you identify in your National Cybersecurity 
Strategy, that dark future seems more immediate, to be honest 
with you. For example, The Wall Street Journal reported last 
week, and I have an article here that I will ask for unanimous 
consent. It talks about China's use of state-sponsored hackers, 
teams of hackers, to employ novel hacking techniques.
    Madam Chair, I ask unanimous consent to submit this Wall 
Street Journal article entitled, ``Wave of Stealthy China 
Cyberattacks Hits U.S. and Private Networks, Google Says.''
    Ms. Mace. Without objection.
    Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Madam Chair. These techniques have 
allowed China to spy on governments and businesses for years 
without detection. These activities are so stealthy that, ``The 
scope of Chinese intrusion into U.S. and Western targets is 
likely far broader than currently known.'' Ms. Walden, what 
solutions do we have in terms of--does the strategy include 
solutions to root out and combat these type of aggressive 
attacks by autocratic state actors, and how successful have we 
been thus far?
    Ms. Walden. So, Pillar 2 of the strategy, in my mind, is 
quite aggressive and forward leaning. It really projects the 
concept that defense is the new offense in this space. But we 
need to lean further into the authorities that we do have to 
dismantle and disrupt while shoring up opportunities with the 
private sector to remove infrastructure that we know that these 
hackers are leveraging. So, there are opportunities for that, 
but really, what is going to happen here is we are going to 
have a cyberspace that is more resilient. There are going to 
always be some sort of holding our infrastructure at risk. We 
need to get in front of that. We cannot just keep playing 
whack-a-mole, essentially. That is the general idea. But I 
would direct your attention to Pillar 2 about our opportunities 
to disrupt and dismantle.
    Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Madam Chair. My time has expired, and 
I yield back. Thank you.
    Ms. Mace. And I will recognize the Ranking Member Connolly 
for five minutes.
    Mr. Connolly. I thank the Chair, and I will not take five 
minutes. I do want to thank the Chair for holding this hearing, 
which is one of a series of hearings planned on cybersecurity, 
AI, IT management in general. And I just want to say thank you 
to Ms. Walden, but I also want to urge, and I know you share 
this view, Madam Chairwoman, we will have you back, and we are 
going to talk about implementation of the strategy because we 
are eager to see that happen.
    And I do believe the task in front of you is herculean. A 
whole-of-government approach to this subject, noble, worthy, 
but very challenging, and we have been working a lot on those 
issues for a long time on this Subcommittee as predecessors. 
So, we certainly want to help, and we want to give you the 
opportunity to share successes and frustrations as we move 
forward.
    I, also, Madam Chair, and then I will yield back. We talked 
earlier about hiring, and I just wanted to commend the three 
bills we are working on. One I have introduced, called the OPM 
Reform Bill to improve our hiring practices. The second I am 
working with Virginia Foxx, Congresswoman Foxx of North 
Carolina, called the Chance to Compete Act, which addresses 
what you were talking about earlier to Madam Chairwoman, to 
increase hiring of people with non-traditional credentials. And 
the third is the NextGen Fed Employee Act, a bill I have 
introduced, which is to try to systematize and professionalize 
the use of internships in the Federal Government. We are so far 
behind the private sector in the use of internships to recruit 
the talent we need for the future, and I am working with 
Chairman Comer on that bill as well.
    So anyway, we are working on trying to bolster how we hire, 
who we hire, and not only recruit but retain that work force of 
the future, and it is particularly acute and important in U.S. 
sphere. With that I yield back, and I thank the Chair.
    Ms. Mace. Thank you, and in closing, and I agree with the 
Ranker, that this is a herculean effort, the tasks before you, 
but know that we are here to assist and help you. We will have 
you back. We are going to want to hear about implementation and 
how that is progressing along as well. The importance, as 
Representative Lynch said earlier, it seems like it is needed 
faster and faster. In particular, I am going back to AI, 
everything that I come back to, because it is advancing so 
quickly.
    We just do not know what we do not know, and we do not know 
how it will impact us, the vulnerabilities that we have. And I 
have great concern, but not just the public sector, but the 
private sector, as well, on this issue, and so we want to offer 
as much support as we can. We will be putting out a portfolio 
of legislation to be helpful, and so in any way that any of us, 
you need us, you call us, and we will be there to assist here.
    So, in closing, I want to thank Ms. Walden for her 
presence. Your testimony today was clearly knowledgeable. It 
was fantastic, and we really appreciate it. We are very 
interested to learn about how the Administration, as 
Congressman Connolly said, will implement this strategy, and we 
are going to want more details on that in our next 
conversation, and we will invite you back.
    So, with that and without objection, all Members will have 
five legislative days within which to submit materials and to 
submit additional written questions for the witness, which will 
be forwarded to the witness for her response.
    Ms. Mace. If there is no further business, and without 
objection, the Subcomittee stands adjourned.
    [Whereupon, at 4:15 p.m., the Subcomittee was adjourned.]

                                 [all]

