
 - LOGIN.GOV DOESN'T MEET THE STANDARD

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]














                  LOGIN.GOV DOESN'T MEET THE STANDARD

=======================================================================

                                HEARING

                               before the

    SUBCOMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS AND THE FEDERAL WORKFORCE

                                 of the

                         COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
                           AND ACCOUNTABILITY

                        HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

                    ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

                             FIRST SESSION

                               __________

                             MARCH 29, 2023

                               __________

                           Serial No. 118-17

                               __________

  Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Accountability



[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]







                       Available on: govinfo.gov 
                         oversight.house.gov or 
                             docs.house.gov 
                             _________
                              
                 U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
                 
51-722 PDF               WASHINGTON : 2023
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
               COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY

                    JAMES COMER, Kentucky, Chairman

Jim Jordan, Ohio                     Jamie Raskin, Maryland, Ranking 
Mike Turner, Ohio                        Minority Member
Paul Gosar, Arizona                  Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of 
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina            Columbia
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin            Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Gary Palmer, Alabama                 Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Clay Higgins, Louisiana              Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois
Pete Sessions, Texas                 Ro Khanna, California
Andy Biggs, Arizona                  Kweisi Mfume, Maryland
Nancy Mace, South Carolina           Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York
Jake LaTurner, Kansas                Katie Porter, California
Pat Fallon, Texas                    Cori Bush, Missouri
Byron Donalds, Florida               Shontel Brown, Ohio
Kelly Armstrong, North Dakota        Jimmy Gomez, California
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            Melanie Stansbury, New Mexico
William Timmons, South Carolina      Robert Garcia, California
Tim Burchett, Tennessee              Maxwell Frost, Florida
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Becca Balint, Vermont
Lisa McClain, Michigan               Summer Lee, Pennsylvania
Lauren Boebert, Colorado             Greg Casar, Texas
Russell Fry, South Carolina          Jasmine Crockett, Texas
Anna Paulina Luna, Florida           Dan Goldman, New York
Chuck Edwards, North Carolina        Jared Moskowitz, Florida
Nick Langworthy, New York
Eric Burlison, Missouri

                       Mark Marin, Staff Director
       Jessica Donlon, Deputy Staff Director and General Counsel
                      Bill Womack, Senior Advisor
             Raj Bharwani, Senior Professional Staff Member
                 Lauren Lombardo, Senior Policy Analyst
      Mallory Cogar, Deputy Director of Operations and Chief Clerk

                      Contact Number: 202-225-5074

                  Julie Tagen, Minority Staff Director
                      Contact Number: 202-225-5051
                                 ------                                

    Subcommittee on Government Operations and the Federal Workforce

                     Pete Sessions, Texas, Chairman
Gary Palmer, Alabama                 Kweisi Mfume, Maryland Ranking 
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                  Minority Member
Andy Biggs, Arizona                  Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of 
Byron Donalds, Florida                   Columbia
William Timmons, South Carolina      Maxwell Frost, Florida
Tim Burchett, Tennessee              Greg Casar, Texas
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Lauren Boebert, Colorado             Melanie Stansbury, New Mexico
Russell Fry, South Carolina          Robert Garcia, California
Chuck Edwards, North Carolina        Becca Balint, Vermont
Eric Burlison, Missouri              Summer Lee, Pennsylvania
                                     Jasmine Crockett, Texas 
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                         C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S 

                              ----------                              

                                                                   Page
Hearing held on March 29, 2023...................................     1

                               Witnesses

Mr. Sonny Hashmi, Commissioner, Federal Acquisition Service, 
  General Services Administration
Oral Statement...................................................     7

Ms. Carol Fortine Ochoa, Inspector General, Office of the 
  Inspector General, General Services Administration
Oral Statement...................................................     6

Mr. Jim St. Pierre, Acting Director, Information Technology 
  Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology
Oral Statement...................................................     9

Written opening statements and statements for the witnesses are 
  available on the U.S. House of Representatives Document 
  Repository at: docs.house.gov.

                           Index of Documents

  * Statement for the Record; submitted by Rep. Connolly.

  * Questions for the Record: to Mr. Hashmi; submitted by Rep. 
  Sessions.

  * Questions for the Record: to Ms. Ochoa; submitted by Rep. 
  Sessions.

  * Questions for the Record: to Mr. St. Pierre; submitted by 
  Rep. Sessions.

Documents are available at: docs.house.gov. 

 
                  LOGIN.GOV DOESN'T MEET THE STANDARD 

                              ----------                              


                       Wednesday, March 29, 2023

                        House of Representatives

               Committee on Oversight and Accountability

    Subcommittee on Government Operations and the Federal Workforce

                                           Washington, D.C.

    The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:45 p.m., in 
room 2247, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Pete Sessions 
(Chairman of the Subcommittee) presiding.
    Present: Representatives Sessions, Higgins, Biggs, Timmons, 
Burchett, Burlison, Mfume, Norton, Frost, and Lee.
    Mr. Sessions. The Subcommittee on Government Operations and 
Federal Workforce will come to order.
    Without objection, Chair may declare a recess at any time.
    And I recognize myself for the purpose of an opening 
statement.
    Good afternoon. Welcome to this hearing. Today we are going 
to focus our attention on Login.gov. Login.gov is intended to 
allow citizens to access Federal services and even some state 
services across different agencies using the same username and 
password. For agencies, Login.gov provides identity 
verifications services which will help applicants who say they 
are who they are.
    Given what we have learned in recent hearings around waste, 
fraud, and abuse in COVID-related programs, the types of 
services Login.gov provides could be an important tool in 
combating fraud, especially fraud resulting from identity 
theft. The problem is that, as documented in a report issued by 
the General Services Administrator inspector general earlier 
this month, Login.gov did not actually provide the services it 
claimed to provide. As the IG report documents, employees and 
leaders in Login.gov and the technology transformation 
services, the branch within GSA which Login.gov falls, knew 
that they did not provide these services. So, not only did 
Login.gov mislead its customers, it charged them for services 
it did not provide. Deception is a bad thing.
    So, it lied when seeking authorization for cloud-based 
services through the Federal RAMP program, and it lied when it 
applied for and received a $187 million grant from the 
Technology Modernization Fund. NIST standard requires agencies, 
including Login.gov, to use biometric comparisons to achieve a 
certain level of security, but Login.gov never performed 
biometric comparisons and it still does not today. These can be 
powerful tools to fight fraud, and presumptively NIST required 
them for that reason, so their lack of representation is a 
significantly important gap in security and saving fraud in and 
with government money.
    To its credit, GSA has accepted what happen at Login.gov. 
They actually asked for the audit. This would be considered 
favorable, but important questions need to be answered. And not 
only has the GSA received this report, but so did Congress on a 
bipartisan basis. Why did this happen, how did it happen, what 
was the impact, and what is being done to fix this problem is a 
fair part and should be a fair part of this hearing today by 
the Subcommittee.
    As for the impact, for the most part, we do not yet know. 
It was beyond the scope of the IG report to determine what 
damage the former fraud resulted, but this Subcommittee needs 
to get those answers. That said, the reputational damage to 
Login.gov, TTS, and GSA are significant, but today we can be on 
the road together to find these answers, to find the direction 
we are going to go, and hold not only Login.gov to its points 
that it makes, but also the reciprocal money that would be 
expended by Members of Congress.
    As one Federal official recently put it, what else about 
GSA services have they been less transparent about? Why did 
this happen? It boils down to the fact that Login.gov employees 
and leaders felt they did not have to follow the rules is what 
some would be led to believe. Express concerns about one type 
of biometric comparison, facial recognition, and the impact it 
could have had on certain demographic groups is one of the 
questions, but there are other ways to perform biometric 
comparisons. Most importantly, you cannot simply express 
concerns about a requirement and then choose not to address the 
issue, and you certainly cannot lie about things that your 
product does and not fix.
    So, how did all this happen? According to IG report and 
previous IG reports, it reflects the culture within TTS and 
especially one of its components, 18F, which built Login.gov. 
TTS and 18F purport to be a startup mentality to government, 
but since its creation, this is equal to running amok. Previous 
IG reports have documented how 18F made a practice of ignoring 
procedures; policy, including hiring policies, policies about 
paying employees and to include information security policies; 
and rules. The previous TTS director, a significant figure in 
this current scandal, also absolved TTS of the burden of 
bringing in revenue from the project it works on.
    The TTS mindset was, albeit, due to a lack of oversight 
from GSA leadership, that meant, we believe, that GSA 
leadership, so to speak, turned a blind eye, to their 
managerial responsibilities. We need to ask these questions. 
GSA needs to look inward and determine what they have done and 
what needs to be done better. I would like to say, it is easy 
simply to tell the truth today, but I think that what we are 
trying to get is, on a bipartisan basis, it is my hope, that 
what we are trying to get at is an opportunity to figure out 
what happened, fix it, and make sure it moves forward properly.
    The fallout from Login.gov appears to only add preexisting 
concerns from inside Federal agencies. As one CIO put it, if 
you talk to any CIO, they tell you that they would not welcome 
having TTS inject themself into their enterprise, and yet that 
became a standard of operation at GSA. So, what is the value? 
Why would Congress continue to support it? All GSA has to say, 
is it is conducting an equity study. What does that involve, 
and who is performing this study, and what would you expect to 
get from it? So, the concerns that we have are more than 
disagreeing with the reply. We think it is a mature opportunity 
to look at and ask questions.
    I have concerns that the Biden Administration may be making 
the problem worse. Login.gov remains a significant part of the 
recently released anti-fraud plan. The IRS announced it was 
going to use Login.gov even after it was widely known it did 
not comply with the NIST standard. There are even concerns with 
pending update on the NIST standard. There are some questions 
about where the IRS position is actually, and I need to admit 
that also.
    Before I refer to our Ranking Member, I would like to 
acknowledge the pain that is experienced by some of our Members 
and to recognize that. I would like to take a moment and offer 
my condolences to our Ranking Member, Mr. Mfume. I learned 
yesterday that you recently experienced the death of one of 
your staff members, Mrs. Diana Gibson. I understand that she 
was with you for 40 years, and I know you feel the loss deeply 
and as profound in your life. On behalf of myself and all of 
the Republican Members and staff of the Committee, I want to 
offer my condolences to you, your staff, and family and friends 
of Mrs. Gibson, and yet I think today we want to acknowledge 
her service to you and this country.
    I would yield to the gentleman for any opening statement. 
Excuse me. The gentleman is recognized.
    Mr. Mfume. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Diana 
Gibson and I were friends for actually well over 40 years. I 
was there when she went to work for our former colleague, the 
late Elijah Cummings, and spent 24 years with him and after 
Elijah's death has been with me up into her own death. We all 
have staff people that we sort of take for granted that they 
will always be there, that they will, you know, outlive us and 
go on to do great things, and that is not always the case. So, 
I appreciate your comments, your condolence, your reference 
here. She gave a lot of herself and her service to this 
country, and it is going to be missed in a lot of different 
ways. So, thank you very much, sir. I appreciate that.
    Today we convene, as the Chairman said, an important 
hearing to discuss a topic that millions of Americans who have 
engaged with the Federal Government's secure online sign-in 
service know what we are talking about. It is Login.gov. If you 
have received unemployment benefits through the Paycheck 
Protection Program, or if you have received a disaster loan 
from the Small Business Administration, or applied for a job 
through U.S.A. Jobs, you have used Login.gov to securely sign 
in and access the much-needed government services that would be 
available. And so, Americans have come to trust Login.gov with 
their sensitive information and, of course, the Federal 
Government relies on Login.gov to help root out any potential 
fraudsters hoping to siphon money away from the essential 
government programs that we support, that we stand up, and we 
expect to carry out their charge.
    Today, unfortunately, we must reconcile certain failures 
that have, indeed, come to light. Just a few weeks ago, the 
General Services administrator and the inspector general 
released an alarming report that details how the GSA misled 
customers on Login.gov's compliance with the identity proofing 
standards that the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology issued some time ago in 2017.
    Federal agencies must ensure that their identity proofing 
and authenticating services meet the NIST standards. For 
government services that may have to have a higher risk of 
fraud, agencies may then require the service provider to meet 
an even higher identity proofing standard. For example, they 
may require more than a username and a password. In these 
cases, they may need to prove who they are by visiting a 
Federal facility in person or by providing biometric data, such 
as a selfie, in an online environment. Login.gov operates a 
high level of identity proofing, but it was not at the IAL2 
level and that standard, which requires biometric data. 
Login.gov failed to offer either an in-person or remote 
identity proofing option, and yet GSA started to bill its 
customers, comprised of roughly 22 agencies, for non-compliant 
services for as many as two years.
    The report found that multiple key personnel informed the 
Login.gov team of its non-compliance with NIST's IAL2 standards 
as early as January 2020, a few months after Login.gov began 
billing its customers. That was not the last time Login.gov was 
informed of its noncompliance, and yet it continued to mislead 
certain customers. It happened again in 2020 when a GSA 
consultant informed senior Login.gov staff persons of its lack 
of an IAL2 component. But it was not until June 2021 that a 
senior official at GSA announced internally that GSA would 
cease its efforts to meet biometric requirements because of 
equity concerns.
    So, what is important to highlight here is that Login.gov 
has never met the standard. At least we have not found any 
proof that it has. It did not meet the standard then and, for 
many of us, it has not found a way to meet that standard today. 
And still Login.gov continued to mislead customer agencies 
about its lack of biometric comparison capabilities until 
January of last year, when the Agency released its equity 
action plan. And then finally, at the end of our five-year 
timeline, GSA notified customer agencies that the services they 
were paying for did not comply with NIST requirements 
published, as I said earlier, back in 2017.
    So, what the report does not show and what is just as 
important to this conversation are the decisive and immediate 
actions taken by GSA leadership when they were finally made 
aware of Login.gov's shortfalls. In February 2022, GSA 
leadership removed the temporary director of Login.gov and 
instituted a temporary director. GSA then initiated a formal 
management inquiry to investigate misrepresentations. By March 
of last year, leadership referred to this matter, or referred 
the matter--excuse me--to the inspector general to undertake a 
non-partisan, impartial review of the matter. Now, I must say 
that it is rare for an agency to actually unilaterally request 
an inspector general review, and I commend the GSA for taking 
that important step.
    GSA leadership has also created a new Technology Law 
Division to specialize in technology-focused legal services. 
This is one action that we should be looking to replicate, I 
think, across all Federal agencies in the future to ensure 
there is adequate understanding of the technology that is being 
deployed. I hope we can explore that today. As the Chairman 
says, we are really trying to get to answers. We know what the 
issues are, but we really are seeking answers as we go forward.
    And last, in October of last year, GSA leadership directed 
Login.gov to undertake a top-to-bottom review of the program. I 
look forward to hearing an update on the progress of that 
review, what it has come up with, and what it is pointing to as 
things that this body and the full Congress should be looking 
out for as we provide the oversight that we are attempting to 
do.
    I want to thank all of our witnesses who are here today 
that the Chair, I am sure, will properly introduce. We have 
been on a crazy little schedule, and so we didn't start when we 
were supposed to start, but we are all together now, and I look 
forward, like so many Members of this panel, to hearing your 
testimony. I yield back.
    Mr. Sessions. The gentleman yields back. Thank you very 
much. It is my hope that our witnesses and those who are guests 
to today's hearing see that the gentleman and I, and our team, 
and his team, and our teams intend to not only vigorously 
pursue the information we have, but to do so in a professional 
standard. And I know that you expect that of me, and thank you 
very much.
    Mr. Mfume. Absolutely.
    Mr. Sessions. I appreciate it. I am now pleased to 
introduce our witnesses for today's hearing. Our first witness 
is Carol Fortine Ochoa, Inspector General for the General 
Services Administration. Ms. Ochoa has been an inspector 
general for GSA since 2015. Prior to that experience, she 
worked for over 25 years as a Federal prosecutor and manager in 
the United States Department of Justice. Thank you for being 
here, Ms. Ochoa.
    Our second witness is Sonny Hashmi, Commissioner of the GSA 
Federal Acquisition Service. Mr. Hashmi has also served as 
GSA's Chief Information Officer and Chief Technology Officer 
and led the Agency in IT modernization strategy. Mr. Hashmi, 
thank you for joining us today.
    Our third witness is Mr. Jim St. Pierre, acting director of 
the NIST--I called it earlier ``NISTA,'' and that is my fault; 
my staff very promptly said quit acting like you are from 
Texas--of the NIST IT Laboratory. In this role, Mr. St. Pierre 
oversees the development, dissemination of standards, measures, 
and testing for IT. Mr. St. Pierre has worked for NIST since 
1994 and has an applied and academic background in electrical 
engineering.
    I want to welcome each of these witnesses, and if I could 
please have you stand and raise your right hand. Pursuant to 
Committee Rule 9(g), the witnesses will raise their hand and 
they answer the following questions.
    Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony that you 
are about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing 
but the truth, so help you God.
    [A chorus of ayes.]
    Mr. Sessions. Thank you very much. Please let the record 
reflect that each of these witnesses all answered in the 
affirmative. And, thank you very much.
    We appreciate you being here today and look forward to your 
testimony. Let me remind the witnesses that we have read your 
written statements, and they will appear in full in the hearing 
record. However, we ask that your oral testimony would be to 
five minutes. That way, we are able to get through the 
questions from those who have spent a good deal of time 
studying on this issue, so thank you very much.
    I think you know how this works. We have four minutes, and 
when four minutes left, the light turns yellow. When the red 
comes on, your five minutes has expired. I would expect that 
you would want me to allow you to finish your sentence, but we 
would like to ask that you please wrap it up pretty quickly 
after that.
    So, Ms. Ochoa, thank you for being here, and the 
gentlewoman is recognized for five minutes.

                    STATEMENT OF CAROL FORTINE OCHOA

                           INSPECTOR GENERAL

                    OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL

                    GENERAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION

    Ms. Ochoa. Thank you, Chairman Sessions, Ranking Member 
Mfume, Members of the Subcommittee. I appreciate the 
opportunity to testify here today about our recent report.
    GSA misled customers on Login.gov's compliance with digital 
identity standards. As you noted in your opening statements, 
Login.gov is the platform which the General Services 
Administration offers to Federal agencies to meet Federal 
cybersecurity requirements for a single sign-on source for the 
American public to use when accessing government services.
    Within the Office of Inspector General, we conduct audits, 
investigations, and evaluations to promote efficiency and 
effectiveness and to prevent and detect waste, fraud, abuse, 
and mismanagement in GSA programs. We began this particular 
evaluation when GSA informed us of possible misconduct--my 
staff in the office responsible for Login.gov. Our evaluation 
found that GSA did mislead its customer agencies by failing to 
tell them about Login.gov's known non-compliance with 
guidelines published by the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology or NIST.
    Notwithstanding GSA's assertions that Login.gov met NIST 
requirements for identity verification, at what is known as 
Identity Assurance Level 2 or IAL2, the truth is that Login.gov 
has never included the physical or biometric comparison that is 
required for identity proofing and authentication at that 
level. At multiple points, starting in 2019, Login.gov 
officials knew and should have notified customer agents that 
Login.gov did not comply with Level 2 requirements. However, 
GSA did not do this.
    Further, the Agency continued to mislead customer agencies 
even after GSA suspended efforts to meet the NIST guidelines in 
June 2021. GSA knowingly billed multiple customer Federal 
agencies over $10 million for IAL2 services that did not, in 
fact, meet IAL2 standards. Additionally, GSA used misleading 
language to secure additional funds for Login.gov from the 
governmentwide Technology Modernization Fund.
    Finally, we found that despite our prior OIG reports 
identifying GSA's inadequate management and oversight of its 
technology transformation services, GSA lacked adequate 
controls over the Login.gov program and allowed it to operate 
under a hands-off culture. We found that because of its failure 
to exercise management oversight and internal controls over the 
technology transformation services in Login.gov, GSA's Federal 
Acquisition Service shares responsibility for the 
misrepresentations to GSA's customers.
    Our report made several recommendations to the Agency to 
address our findings, including that the Agency establish 
adequate management controls over the technology transformation 
services, undertake a comprehensive review of its billings to 
customer agencies, and establish a system to ensure compliance 
with relevant standards. We were pleased that GSA management 
referred this matter to us and that it agrees with our findings 
and our recommendations. The Agency has 60 days from the 
issuance of the report to provide us with a corrective action 
plan, which we will look forward to receiving and reviewing.
    I, again, appreciate the invitation to appear here today 
and to share with you this recent work by our office. We 
appreciate your interest in and support for our work, and I am 
happy to answer your questions.
    Mr. Sessions. Thank you very much.
    [Audio issues in room.]

                       STATEMENT OF SONNY HASHMI

               COMMISSIONER, FEDERAL ACQUISITION SERVICE

                    GENERAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION

    Mr. Hashmi. Good afternoon, Chairman Sessions, Ranking 
Member Mfume, and Members of the Committee. Thank you for the 
opportunity to come before you and discuss the Login.gov 
program, a part of the U.S. General Services Administration's 
Technology Transformation Service, or TTS, a component of the 
Federal Acquisition Service. My name is Sonny Hashmi. I am the 
Commissioner for the Federal Acquisition Service, and I am 
honored to testify before you, alongside my colleagues from 
NIST, National Institute of Standards and Technology; and the 
Inspector General--I do apologize--the Inspector General of the 
General Services Administration.
    First, let me state very plainly, the misrepresentations 
made by the Login team in this matter were absolutely 
unacceptable. This was a serious issue which GSA identified and 
has been working very collaboratively with the IG to address 
since we learned of the problem in early 2022. Today, I want to 
update the Committee on our actions to date. Before I do that, 
let me say a word about what Login.gov is and why it is 
important.
    The public deserves a secure, identity-proofing solution 
that ensures access, protects privacy, and prevents fraud. 
Identity verification is a requirement for people to access 
services at all levels of government. Historically, when 
someone sought to renew a passport or to apply for veterans' 
benefits, they did so in person by presenting a government-
issued ID. Increasingly, people need to access and obtain these 
services virtually, so we need a similar mechanism to verify 
these identities.
    Login.gov is an authentication and identity verification 
solution that helps the American people securely and readily 
access the government services they need while protecting their 
privacy and preventing fraud. Having a public solution for 
identity verification is critical for a number of reasons. 
First, we can prevent fraud by driving a single and secure 
service that provides robust security controls. Second, we can 
protect people's information, and third, we can make accessing 
government services simpler and more secure for the public and 
ensure we serve all Americans.
    As GSA moves forward to implement the IG's recommendations, 
I want to make sure the Committee is aware of the actions we 
have taken since learning of this issue. We notified GSA's 
Inspector General immediately upon learning of this issue in 
early 2022. We notified customers and agency partners, 
including the TMF board, about the misrepresentations, and 
modified interagency agreements to accurately reflect the 
services provided. We replaced leadership of the program and 
launched an employee disciplinary inquiry. And all those who we 
are aware of, who knowingly misrepresented features of 
Login.gov, are no longer employed by the GSA.
    We launched a top-to-bottom internal management review of 
the program's compliance roadmap, customer communications, 
internal controls environment, financial operations, human 
resources, and contracts. And we strengthened accountability 
and oversight practices, including the creation of a new 
Technology Law Division in GSA's Office of the General Counsel 
and a new executive steering committee, comprised of technology 
leaders at OMB. These actions have strengthened the management 
of Login.gov program.
    While there were serious management challenges at Login.gov 
and TTS, I want to make it clear that Login.gov itself is a 
strong service. Login.gov has a robust suite of security 
features to prevent fraud, like mandatory multi-factor 
authentication, phone and address verification, and we continue 
to add more features targeting bad actors, bots, and other 
threat vectors. Login.gov also has a strong encryption model to 
protect the privacy of the citizens who use it, ensuring that 
users, not corporations, control access to their own 
information. And Login.gov is FedRAMP authorized, meaning that 
extensive controls are in place and independently audited to 
ensure the system is secure from cybersecurity threats.
    Moreover, GSA continues to enhance the Login.gov service 
for better delivery for the needs of our customers. Since its 
referral to the inspector general, GSA has expanded options for 
secured identity verification. GSA is now piloting a service, 
in partnership with the U.S. Postal Service, to allow certain 
users to complete their identity verification in person at one 
of over 18,000 locations across the country. And GSA has scaled 
up Login.gov's contact center to provide 24/7 customer support 
so that constituents can get help with their identity 
verification process at all hours.
    Overall, Login.gov is a strong product that provides robust 
identity verification services across government. We have taken 
many actions to improve the management of Login.gov and TTS, 
and will take further steps to ensure that we remain 
accountable and transparent. We are committed to maintaining 
the trust for our customers, stakeholders, and the public as we 
deliver a secured entity verification solution.
    Finally, I want to, once again, thank the IG for our 
office's evaluation and their view of the matter. I am happy to 
answer any questions the Committee might have. Thank you.
    Mr. Sessions. Sure. Thank you very much. That was a mature 
response to the important issues that need to begin resolution. 
I appreciate your attitude. Mr. St. Pierre?

                      STATEMENT OF JIM ST. PIERRE

                            ACTING DIRECTOR

                   INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY LABORATORY

                    NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS

                             AND TECHNOLOGY

    Mr. St. Pierre. Chairman Sessions, Ranking Member Mfume, 
and Members of the Subcommittee, I am Jim St. Pierre, the 
Acting Director of the Information Technology Laboratory at the 
Department of Commerce's National Institute of Standards and 
Technology, known as NIST. It is an honor to testify today on 
behalf of NIST and how we develop guidance, and about our 
digital identity guidelines, Special Publication 800-63.
    The mission of NIST is to promote U.S. innovation and 
industrial competitiveness by advancing measurement science, 
standards, and technology in ways that enhance economic 
security and improve our quality of life. NIST's role in 
cybersecurity is to provide standards, guidance, tools, data 
references, and testing methods to protect information systems 
against threats to confidentiality, integrity, and access 
availability of information services.
    The Cyber Security Enhancement Act of 2014 authorized NIST 
to facilitate and support the development of voluntary, 
industry-led cybersecurity standards and best practices for 
critical infrastructure. Under the Federal Information Security 
Modernization Act, NIST develops security standards and 
guidelines for non-national security Federal agency systems, 
which may be made mandatory for Federal agencies, as is the 
case for NIST Special Publication 800-63 digital identity 
guidelines. NIST does not, however, oversee the adoption or 
implementation of information security standards and guidelines 
by Federal agencies or ensure agency compliance where they are 
adopted.
    In developing its guidelines, NIST prides itself on the 
strong partnerships we have developed and relies upon 
transparent and collaborative processes that enlists broad 
expertise from government, industry, academia, and nonprofit 
entities to develop and improve our cybersecurity resources.
    As part of our research, NIST maintains and regularly 
updates its digital identity guidelines, Special Publication 
800-63. The current version of this guidance, which is Revision 
3, was published in June 2017, and details the process for 
organizations' management of digital identity risk and use of 
digital identity products and services. These guidelines 
provide requirements for Federal agencies implementing digital 
identity services. They can also be voluntarily adopted by non-
Federal organizations. The guidelines cover identity proofing 
and authentication for individual users, such as employees, 
contractors, or private individuals, interacting with 
government information technology systems over open networks.
    The guidelines detail a risk management process that seeks 
to achieve both interoperability and flexibility. SP 800-63 
provides a common language and taxonomy to allow organizations 
to identify risks and select one of three defined groups of 
baseline controls depending on their assessment of their risk 
profile. Organizations that implement the guidance are allowed 
to select and implement compensating controls, provided they 
document their decision and offer justification based on risk. 
In practice, this allows organizations implementing these 
digital identity guidelines to review specific controls, such 
as biometric comparison or evidence requirements, and choose to 
document and implement comparable alternative controls. This 
allows organizations to maintain broad interoperability while 
allowing for modifications to meet organizational and mission-
specific needs.
    A draft of Revision 4 of SP 800-63 is currently out for 
public comment through April 14, 2023. This is following a 
robust engagement process to gain feedback from public and 
private sector organizations on how to improve the draft 
guidance and achieve a more secure identity ecosystem.
    NIST is proud of its role in establishing and improving 
cybersecurity solutions, standards, guidelines, and other 
resources, and of the longstanding and robust collaboration we 
have established with our Federal Government partners, private 
sector collaborators, and international colleagues. Thank you 
for the opportunity to discuss NIST activities related to 
digital identity guidelines. I will be pleased to answer any 
questions you may have.
    Mr. Sessions. Mr. St. Pierre, thank you very much. The 
distinguished gentleman from Louisiana is recognized for five 
minutes.
    Mr. Higgins. I thank the Chairman. My, my, my. I am going 
to attempt to ask some questions that might have meaning to the 
American people because this is a complex topic that we are 
discussing today.
    Madam Inspector General, I am going to be asking you these 
questions. My understanding here is, just sort of to sum it up, 
is that what we are looking at essentially is theft by fraud, 
by misrepresentation, by a government agency through government 
entities with money flowing back into the government agencies 
regarding Login.gov, a service provided across the government 
to verify the identity of applicants to determine that they are 
who they claim to be, and that the levels of security required 
in these applications call for a very strict standard of 
verification, and that standard was presented as being met, and 
yet it was not met. And there was payment made for years for 
services rendered at a particular level, and it has come to our 
attention that that level of service had never been rendered. 
So, this is a complex series of events.
    Madam Inspector General, I will just ask you, and I will 
give you sufficient time to reply. Who is being held 
accountable? Is anyone getting fired or going to jail? Who is 
suspended? Where is the money, and how much money was 
fraudulently billed by misrepresentation through the Login.gov 
network? If you understand my questions, who is being held 
accountable, has anybody been fired, is anybody going to jail, 
how much money was fraudulently billed through 
misrepresentation of capabilities, and where is that money? 
Madam Chair, I yield for you to answer. I am sorry, Madam 
Inspector General.
    Ms. Ochoa. Thank you. I think the short answer to the 
question on accountability is that the GSA OIG does not have 
the authority to hold accountable agency employees for 
misconduct. That authority rests with the agency, so I would 
defer to----
    Mr. Higgins. So, your chain of command through the Federal 
Government, which ultimately would reside with the President of 
the United States and his Secretary-level advisors to make 
decisions regarding who gets fired here, and who is held 
accountable, or who is prosecuted, et cetera?
    Ms. Ochoa. As to the question of prosecution, we did not 
find evidence of criminal false statements in this matter, so 
we made no referrals for criminal prosecution. As to 
administrative misconduct, we referred the results of our 
evaluation to the Agency. Agency leadership is responsible for 
holding accountable those employees, and we have been told that 
the Agency has disciplinary proceedings underway.
    Mr. Higgins. Have you witnessed any of those disciplinary 
proceedings, like notices coming, advisements to you by emails 
or anything else, or any documentation of accountability that 
you have observed, good lady? And I ask this respectfully. It 
is a legitimate question.
    Ms. Ochoa. I appreciate the question. We have not received 
such notices from the Agency that I am aware of.
    Mr. Higgins. Did either of you gentlemen--are you aware of 
official accountability action that has been taken here?
    Mr. Hashmi. Yes, Congressman. Thank you for that question. 
My name is Sonny. I am responsible for the program that this 
report identifies. As I mentioned in my opening statement, 
immediately upon finding out about this issue earlier last 
year, we initiated an internal inquiry for employee discipline 
based on information that we had, and we have continued to 
provide that information to the individuals who are looking at 
disciplinary actions. In fact, to date, as of today, none of 
the employees who were identified to have misled their 
customers knowingly are employed by the GSA. So, while due 
process continues, we have made sure that those employees no 
longer are employed by our Agency.
    Mr. Higgins. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, my time has expired, 
but we never quite got to the money. Where is the money and how 
much? So perhaps another Member during questioning could get to 
that. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I yield.
    Mr. Sessions. The gentleman yields back his time. The 
gentleman from Maryland, Mr. Mfume, is recognized for five 
minutes. Sir?
    Mr. Mfume. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Madam 
Inspector General, I want to commend you on the work that you 
did in compiling this report. I noticed that there are a number 
of redactions. Is that, in each instance, to protect the name 
of an individual?
    Ms. Ochoa. Yes, it is.
    Mr. Mfume. And were there other instances of redaction that 
did not fall into that category but were done for another 
reason?
    Ms. Ochoa. No. No, these were names of individuals.
    Mr. Mfume. OK. This is a very damning report. I mean, we 
have all kind of said that. You have pretty much said it also 
as the inspector general here. It is a very damning report 
against GSA, the one agency that we trust to do the sort of 
oversight of other agencies, and of the government, and of the 
government's money, so it is very disconcerting. The GSA 
clearly has tarnished its own name here, and the question 
becomes, how do they get out of this hole? Now, I said earlier 
that I wanted to commend them for unilaterally requesting the 
inspector general to get involved, but that was years down the 
road. And I don't know if there was anything in your report 
that would suggest why it took so long for the GSA to recognize 
that it had a problem.
    Mr. Sessions. Excuse me. Would the gentlewoman answer the 
question despite it being in the report? If the gentlewoman 
would answer the gentleman's question. It is appreciated.
    Ms. Ochoa. I think I was being told that my microphone was 
off. Sorry about that.
    Mr. Sessions. That is OK.
    Ms. Ochoa. Yes, we did address that in the report. We have 
had several prior reports at the Inspector General's Office 
pointing out the lack of management oversight and controls over 
that particular technology unit. And for whatever reason, that 
culture of noncompliance was allowed to persist, and we make 
mention of that in the report. I think that is the best answer 
that----
    Mr. Mfume. Yes, it must have been a real deep sort of 
culture to exist and then resist the sort of scrutiny that 
everyday people would have who are part of the Agency. I just 
find that to be amazing that they lacked adequate controls. I 
want to talk about the Federal Acquisition Service also in just 
a moment, but the deliberate misrepresentation to government 
agencies that they were being billed as they should be when 
they were not getting the services that they, in fact, paid 
for.
    But let us talk about the Acquisition Service for just a 
minute. I am still trying to get my hand around this. This is a 
very, very serious issue here. What happened in that service, 
that division, or, better still, what did not happen that 
allowed this to continue to go on and on and on? Could you 
speak to that for just a moment?
    Mr. Hashmi. Congressman, thank you for that question, and 
forgive me for clarifying. I believe you are talking about the 
Technology Transformation Service, that division.
    Mr. Mfume. Mm-hmm.
    Mr. Hashmi. Yes, thank you for that question. Listen, I 
can't speak to events from 2, 3, 4 years ago. Certainly, the IG 
reports speak for themselves. What I can speak to and which I 
want to reemphasize is that these misrepresentations, in my 
experience, and I have been a public servant for many, many 
years, represent the absolute unacceptable approach for 
government to conduct business. And that is exactly why in 
2022, when I first became aware of the issues, I made sure that 
internally and with the IG, we have full transparency.
    My first action, immediately upon learning it, was reach 
out to our customers to ensure that they know the full truth so 
that we are not continuing this cycle of misrepresentation 
that, for whatever reason, has existed for many years. That 
notification then led to several communications that we 
continue to do to this date. The next opportunity for me was to 
make sure that people are held accountable, and we want to make 
sure that we see the full truth, we identify all the details, 
and we take management employee disciplinary actions 
immediately. Last, it is clear that internal controls need to 
be in place, and clearly, they were not sufficient to prevent 
this sort of thing happening.
    Mr. Mfume. OK.
    Mr. Hashmi. And so, my third action--sorry, sir.
    Mr. Mfume. No, no, no. My time is just about up, but just 
one quick question, if I might, Mr. Chairman. We rely on 
Login.gov to help us to root out potential fraudsters. There 
are a lot of bad guys out there, and for this to have gone on 
this long, we don't know if they were siphoning off money from 
essential government programs. And has anybody in any way 
worked with the Justice Department to make them aware of the 
fact that there could be possible criminal activity here or was 
possible criminal activity that denied everyday taxpayers the 
right to believe that their money was being used as it should?
    Mr. Hashmi. If I may, sir. Just in full disclosure, this 
particular issue that we have worked with the IG on does not 
represent a cybersecurity breach or somebody's information 
being exfiltrated. While these misrepresentations are 
absolutely unacceptable, we have no evidence based on all the 
assessments over the last year that this has led to any 
particular cases of----
    Mr. Mfume. Of fraud. We don't know because we are not 
looking, apparently. I don't think we can make the assumption 
that nothing bad happened when for five years this 
misrepresentation occurred, and there are a lot of programs 
within the government that go every day to help people that are 
affected by this kind of a breach. I don't want to prolong it. 
I will leave it there. Mr. Chairman, thank you. I yield back.
    Mr. Sessions. Thank you very much. The distinguished 
gentleman from Arizona, Mr. Biggs, is recognized for five 
minutes.
    Mr. Biggs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You know, Mr. Hashmi, I 
am baffled. You have now said this was unacceptable five times. 
This is more than unacceptable. This is, in my opinion--is 
criminal. I looked up the definition of ``fraud,'' just the 
criminal definition of ``fraud.'' Make sure I am still there on 
that. It is a deliberate scheme to obtain financial or other 
gain by using false statements, misrepresentations, or 
concealment. To me, that is the classic element of fraud. That 
is fraud. That is criminality. Somebody should be held 
accountable. And I want to ask about 18F. Tell me what 18F was, 
please?
    Mr. Hashmi. Yes, Congressman. Thank you. 18F is a division 
within the Technology Transformation Service. The core issue 
that the 18F tries to solve for is the need to bring in modern 
technology talent to help agencies----
    Mr. Biggs. And where did they come from? Where did these 
guys and gals, this group of 18F, where did they come from to 
get into the TTS division and start working on this?
    Mr. Hashmi. Sir, we recruit personnel within 18F from all 
the different sources that any agency recruits for: private 
sector----
    Mr. Biggs. And they were the group that were working on 
Login.gov. They are the ones that said we are going to make 
this comply with IAL2, right?
    Mr. Hashmi. With respect, Congressman, 18F is a separate 
division from Login.gov. The two divisions are not the same.
    Mr. Biggs. But they had a contract. They were working with 
Login.gov. Isn't that true? They are a quasi-governmental 
institution. They are not a government entity. They are a 
quasi-government entity. Is that not right?
    Mr. Hashmi. With respect, Congressman, they are a 
government entity.
    Mr. Biggs. OK. So, they are all in the government?
    Mr. Hashmi. Yes, sir.
    Mr. Biggs. OK. They were the ones working on Login.gov, 
they are the ones that were trying to get contracts, et cetera, 
and they are the ones that made the claims that they were going 
to make this IAL2 compliant. Isn't that true?
    Mr. Hashmi. Again, with respect, Congressman, they are a 
different division from Login.gov. They are not related.
    Mr. Biggs. You are telling me that they had nothing to do 
with getting to IAL2. Is that what you are telling me?
    Mr. Hashmi. Congressman, yes, the Login.gov team is 
responsible for that compliance and misrepresentation.
    Mr. Biggs. So, 18F had nothing to do with it?
    Mr. Hashmi. Sir, in this particular instance, 18F is a 
separate----
    Mr. Biggs. OK. So, who was it that was making the 
misrepresentation saying that we are IAL2 compliant? Let's see. 
I am looking at the timeline, November 2019. That is when GSA 
started billing customers for Login.gov IAL2 compliance.
    Mr. Hashmi. As is outlined in the IG's report, yes, this 
misrepresentation does go back several years.
    Mr. Biggs. Who is it? I said who. I know it goes back. I 
have read the report. Who was it that was making the 
representations beginning in November 2019 when you are 
soliciting contracts. Not just soliciting. You are billing 
customers fraudulently for services that you cannot render. Who 
was doing that?
    Mr. Hashmi. Sir, as I have mentioned in my testimony, 
several folks within the Login.gov team were identified.
    Mr. Biggs. Who?
    Mr. Hashmi. Like I said, sir, several folks who are no 
longer with the Agency.
    Mr. Biggs. Who, and have they been referred for 
prosecution? Criminal fraud requires a deliberate act, and you 
got $10 million that came in. That was, I think, the IG's 
report, $10 million from clients. That seems deliberate. There 
was consideration exchanged, and somebody deliberately 
misrepresented things. And then they submitted requests for an 
additional $187 million. Did they receive anything prior to 
that from the same organizations? From the TMF, they wanted 
$187, Technology Modernization Fund. Did they get anything 
prior to 2021?
    Mr. Hashmi. Not to my knowledge, Congressman, no.
    Mr. Biggs. I will ask the IG, Ms. Ochoa. Did they receive 
anything other than that $10 million from clients? I thought 
you said they received additional funds.
    Ms. Ochoa. Our report speaks to the $187 million they 
received from Technology Modernization Fund.
    Mr. Biggs. So, when I read the report, it said that in 
September 2021, that is when they ultimately received $187 
million because they could comply, and that is on page 18 of 
your report. That is because they claimed that they were in 
compliance with IAL2. Is that right?
    Ms. Ochoa. They did, yes.
    Mr. Biggs. OK. Well, Mr. Chairman, there is so much more 
that I would like to ask, and I am out of time, but, I mean, I 
have asked who was fired. They won't tell me.
    Mr. Sessions. Who was fired?
    Mr. Biggs. Yes, who was fired, I have asked, and they said 
they haven't made referrals criminally. This is a criminal 
fraud. I want to know where the money is, when we are going to 
get it back, and I want to know who is being held accountable, 
Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
    Mr. Sessions. I want to thank the gentleman and all 
Committee Members. I believe that this entire Committee sees 
the purpose of this hearing. The purpose of this hearing is to 
begin this face-to-face investigation by the IG, by those 
people who, I think, have reasonably and professionally owned 
up to the frailties. And this is the beginning of that, and I 
will assure the gentleman from Arizona, and the gentleman from 
Louisiana, as well as others on this Committee that we will be 
very pleased to get these answers. We will work with the GSA to 
have it done in a professional way that will include Mr. Mfume 
and myself on that request, and I thank the gentleman for his 
insistence. Thank you very much. Excuse me, just a moment. Oh, 
you said thank you?
    Mr. Biggs. I want to say, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Mr. Sessions. Oh, yes, sir. Mr. Frost, you are recognized 
for five minutes.
    Mr. Frost. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our 
witnesses. On the website of Login.gov, it states that it is 
the public's one account for government. Agencies that use 
Login.gov's platform include SBA, Department of Defense, 
Veterans Affairs, Department of Agriculture. Each of these 
agencies has a complex mission that involves engaging sensitive 
information, including the personally identifiable information 
of American citizens, which is incredibly important and 
sensitive. To properly secure this information, the National 
Institute of Standards and Technology establishes guidelines 
for digital identity standards. Mr. St. Pierre, how does the 
NIST ensure the security and strength of this type of 
information and the verification standards, and why are these 
standards so important?
    Mr. St. Pierre. Thank you for the question. So, we 
developed them in an open and transparent process with 
industry, other government agencies' experts, and other 
government agencies, and industry, and academia, and other 
colleagues. This guideline is to help agencies develop digital 
identity systems and ensure that they are secure. It is based 
on a risk management or risk approach, and so there are 
different levels of security that can be achieved. The agency 
would assess the risk of their system, and then based on that 
risk assessment, that determines what level of controls they 
need. The highest level of controls would be for the highest 
risk, and so that is the way the process works.
    Mr. Frost. Got you.
    Mr. St. Pierre.. Yes.
    Mr. Frost. Yes. Thank you so much. Madam Inspector General, 
when Federal agencies partner with Login.gov or any identity 
proofing service, why is it critical that the agency have trust 
with that service provider?
    Ms. Ochoa. As I understand it, the agencies choose for 
themselves the risk level that is necessary, depending on the 
services that they are offering. And so, they are then 
representing to their customer taxpayers that their information 
will be secure, so it is critical that they trust the platform 
that they have chosen.
    Mr. Frost. Yes. And even on the website, I mean, in the 
mission statement, it says, ``When it comes to logging into 
government websites, agencies trust Login.gov to help protect 
their users' information, and the public trust Login.gov to 
streamline their sign in process.'' Login knew that trust was 
foundational to their success, and also to the success and to 
the American people using the platform, which makes the breach 
of trust so upsetting.
    Commissioner Hashmi, in the OIG report, you attribute 
Login.gov's breach of trust to, and we kind of spoke about this 
earlier, the culture of oversight being burdensome. Can you 
explain what you meant by that and why the FAS didn't do more 
to address this culture when it first assumed responsibility of 
Login.gov?
    Mr. Hashmi. Well, thank you for the question, Congressman. 
I wholeheartedly agree with you. Trust is the key currency that 
we must maintain when we build services for other agencies. I 
will say that in order to ensure that trust, it requires that 
we internally have adequate internal processes and internal 
controls in place. It is clear from the report that that was 
not the case here. And for many years, that lack of internal 
controls led people to make statements without appropriate 
oversight, without checking and balancing, without third 
parties looking at those statements and making sure that they 
are sufficient, accurate, and complete. So that is one of the 
reasons why the immediate action for us was not just to notify 
customers, but being as transparent as possible. And then 
secondly, immediately focusing on the internal controls that we 
need to put in place.
    Mr. Frost. But why don't you all do more sooner?
    Mr. Hashmi. Well, sir, I can only speak to when I became 
aware of the issues and the actions that I took. Of course, 
many people in the past have made choices that I can't speak 
to. But my job, as now that I am aware and, again, is to not 
only take the actions that we have done and scale them, but 
also fully implement the recommendations that the IG has made. 
I do believe that those recommendations, taken as a whole, will 
make the program stronger, and ultimately, it is up to us to 
earn that trust back. And with one phone call at a time, I am 
making sure that agencies have full transparency into what we 
do and how we do it, and then, ultimately, they can make 
informed decisions about whether Login is the right solution 
for them.
    Mr. Frost. Thank you. I appreciate the comprehensive plan 
you have laid out today to remedy this very, very troubling 
matter. Login.gov serves a critical purpose for Federal 
agencies, as we all know, and I just want to urge you to ensure 
that the remedial actions discussed today are implemented 
quickly and completely to protect the privacy and data of our 
people. Thank you so much. I yield back.
    Mr. Hashmi. You have my commitment, sir. Thank you.
    Mr. Sessions. Mr. Frost, thank you very much. This is the 
kind of professional, I believe, response and questions that we 
are after, and I want to commend the panel and our Members for 
their behavior in that endeavor. Thank you very much. The 
gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Timmons, is recognized for 
five minutes.
    Mr. Timmons. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This has been very 
productive. I appreciate that we have wasted millions of 
dollars creating Login.gov and them alleging that they were 
providing a service that they do not, but it actually costs 
tens of billions of dollars, particularly as it relates to 
SBA's work during the pandemic. They were responsible with 
identifying PPP and EIDL applications.
    So, we have already identified that those applications 
likely resulted in tens of billions, if not a hundred billion 
dollars, being stolen, outright theft. And if Login.gov had 
done their job, those applications would have two-factor 
authentication. We would be able to say this is actually who 
did this. It would be harder to commit that fraud, and if you 
did commit that fraud, you would be held accountable because we 
knew who you were. So, it is not just ten million dollars that 
we have lost. It is tens of billions of dollars because of a 
fraud that was allowed during the pandemic.
    Inspector General Ochoa, I guess my question is, how did 
GSA's misrepresentation of Login.gov's capabilities affect 
SBA's work during the pandemic, particularly as it relates to 
PPP and EIDL programs? And is it fair to say that Login.gov is 
a contributing factor, to the extent of the fraud that we saw 
and makes it harder to hold people accountable? Is that fair?
    Ms. Ochoa. You are asking a very broad question about and a 
good question about the----
    Mr. Timmons. If Login.gov had done what it said it could 
do, would it be harder to steal from PPP and EIDL and easier to 
hold people accountable that did?
    Ms. Ochoa. IAL2 is meant to be a fraud detection.
    Mr. Timmons. So, we would have a higher degree of 
confidence to know who took out these fraudulent loans, well, 
just who took out the loan. I mean, PPP and EIDL, thousands and 
thousands of loans were taken out by people that weren't who 
they said they were, so this would prevent that. If Login.gov 
had been able to do what they allege they were doing, that 
would not be possible.
    Ms. Ochoa. I can't speak to SBA's experience with 
Login.gov. To determine the impact on any particular agency 
requires a robust investigation into those agency operations. 
This is beyond my jurisdiction.
    Mr. Timmons. I will shorten the answer, it did. SBA relied 
on Login.gov, and they lied with what they were able to do, and 
it is going to cost us tens of billions of dollars if we ever 
get it back. Let's go to Acting Director St. Pierre. So, if 
Login.gov's capabilities had not been misrepresented and the 
IAL2 standards were in place, do you think that SBA would be 
able to better identify the individuals that took out these 
pandemic relief loans and possibly make it easier to prosecute 
them?
    Mr. St. Pierre.. Thank you for the question. So, NIST is 
neither an oversight or enforcement agency, but your question 
is about if IAL2 had not been implemented, is that correct?
    Mr. Timmons. Well, if it had been effectively implemented--
--
    Mr. St. Pierre.. OK.
    Mr. Timmons [continuing]. Because SBA, they thought they 
did, but they don't, so we have all of these loans out there 
that we don't know who got them.
    Mr. St. Pierre.. So IAL2, as you said, it ensures that you 
have confidence in who you are speaking to. So, without 
mitigating that, you would not be mitigating the level of risk 
that your system design had intended.
    Mr. Timmons. You would just know who you are talking to?
    Mr. St. Pierre.. No, I am saying, if you did not implement 
it, you would not have the level of mitigation that you had 
planned for if you did not implement IAL2.
    Mr. Timmons. OK.
    Mr. St. Pierre.. However, I can't speak to what level of 
fraud may or may not have been attributable to the system.
    Mr. Timmons. If Login.gov had worked as intended, we would 
have a higher degree in confidence in knowing who we were 
communicating with through the SBA portal?
    Mr. St. Pierre.. So, I can't make a determination on that 
because I don't know enough. I am not an oversight agency. We 
don't look at this overall system and if there are other 
controls that they have with other----
    Mr. Timmons. OK. Well, the fraud that was perpetrated by 
Login.gov, as it relates to SBA, makes it harder for us to hold 
individuals that committed fraud accountable because we don't 
necessarily know who they are because Login.gov didn't work as 
it was intended. Given all of these problems with Login.gov, I 
guess my question is, there are conversations about an 
executive order to expand its use. I would say that that is 
just a terrible idea. I mean, we need to reevaluate the 
effectiveness of it. We need to confirm that it works. Social 
Security, VA, and the IRS have already went with a third party 
that is able to actually do what they say they can do. So, I 
mean, we need to evaluate all of our options to make sure that 
we are actually getting the service that we are paying for. I 
would pose that as a question, but at the end of the day, I am 
out of time. I am sorry.
    Mr. Chairman, this is very important. We cannot keep 
wasting taxpayer dollars, and it is costing more than we have 
even talked about. Thank you for having this hearing. With 
that, I yield back.
    Mr. Sessions. Thank you very much. The gentleman is 
correct, and Mr. Mfume and I intend to do that. You would be a 
part of the follow-up and the opportunity as we meet with those 
leaders of GSA. And thank you very much. The gentlewoman, Ms. 
Lee from Pennsylvania, is recognized for five minutes.
    Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to refocus 
just for a moment on what began this whole incident. At the 
heart of the misrepresentation by Login.gov was one official's 
attempt to protect citizens from discrimination by algorithms. 
So, to quote one of the messages found in the investigation, 
``The benefits of the liveness/selfie do not outweigh any 
discriminatory impact.'' I am not praising his actions, but 
while we are weeding through the facts and looking for a way 
forward, we must do better to bring more diverse perspectives 
into the mix. Facial recognition technology is becoming more 
accurate, but time and time again, these systems have been 
found to not work for Black women, for non-binary people, and 
for Asian people.
    Mr. Saint Pierre, what actions are being taken in the 
industry to improve facial recognition technology and decrease 
bias in the systems?
    Mr. St. Pierre.. So, thank you for the question. So, NIST 
has actually looked at this issue and done a study of bias in 
facial recognition algorithms that was published in 2019, and 
that study did find that nearly all algorithms have bias for 
demographic differentials. However, it is important to note 
that those algorithms, they are the best algorithms too, have a 
significant difference from the lowest-performing algorithms, 
and it is also important to note that over that time, since 
then, they have improved as well. And so that is a positive to 
see that those algorithms are improving.
    Ms. Lee. Thank you. In response to the valid criticism of 
the issues with Login.gov, GSA is planning to complete an 
equity study to better inform future use of biometrics. Mr. 
Hashmi wrote that he hopes the equity study will help GSA 
``understand the current technological barriers to equitable 
remote identity proofing services for the public.'' Mr. Hashmi, 
when did GSA launch the equity study, and what is the timeline 
for its completion, and will it be made public?
    Mr. Hashmi. Thank you very much, Congresswoman. Just for 
the record, in response to this very important issue, all of 
the actions that I have outlined in my testimony remain strong, 
obviously, making sure internal controls are in place, making 
sure we are holding employees accountable and being transparent 
with our customers. In reference to the equity study, 
ultimately let me be very clear. Any technology that we 
implement that face and allow Americans to access government 
service has, in my view, to meet three very important criteria. 
It must balance the need for access for all Americans against 
making sure that their privacy is protected and ensuring that 
appropriate fraud management controls are baked in. That is our 
goal with Login.gov. We continue to make progress there.
    In terms of the equity study, that is work we started a 
while ago, independent of this particular investigation, to 
ensure that we have full understanding from academia, from 
research organizations and the private sector on the best and 
brightest technologies that are available to be able to test 
and validate them, and to be thoughtful about how to implement 
those technologies. At this moment, we do consider that there 
are significant privacy implications as well as access 
implications to using certain technologies like facial 
recognition, as you mentioned. We want to make sure that we 
continue to investigate it, and we will implement those 
technologies when they become ready to go live.
    Ms. Lee. Thank you. Our STEM industry overall is severely 
lacking in diversity. Black people make up just nine percent of 
the STEM work force and Hispanic people just eight percent. 
Last year, GSA released its equity action plan to advance 
racial equity and support underserved communities. The plans 
helped these goals of integrating diversity, equity, and 
inclusion in everything from delivering projects to designing 
websites. Mr. Hashmi, what specific steps has GSA taken since 
announcing this plan to better include diverse people and 
perspectives?
    Mr. Hashmi. Thank you, Congresswoman. They are a very 
important topic. Unfortunately, in 50 seconds, I will probably 
require more time to have a fuller briefing for you. We are 
very proud of the work that we have done over the last two 
years.
    Mr. Sessions. The gentleman is recognized for four minutes.
    Mr. Hashmi. Thank you, Chairman. Let me outline some of the 
things we have done to pursue--make progress in that front. In 
the Federal Acquisition Service, our primary focus and 
continues to be to make sure that diverse businesses become 
part of the Federal marketplace. We have done significant work 
in that front. As of today, we are proud to say that over 35 
percent of the dollars that flow through the Federal 
Acquisition Service go to small and disadvantaged businesses, 
including those that are considered to be in the categories 
such as women-owned small businesses, hubs-owned small 
businesses, and veteran-owned small businesses. We also are 
doubling our commitment to flowing more acquisition dollars 
toward those businesses that are designated as a special 
category, disabled. So, those are just two examples.
    In the area of technology transformation service, we 
recognize that the products we make need to serve all Americans 
equally. We have seen not just issues with equity around 
certain demographics, but we have seen that technology 
sometimes leave behind people in rural America who don't have 
access to broadband capabilities, modern devices, smartphones, 
and such. So, we continue to think about ways that we can bring 
all those Americans into the fold because in many cases, those 
communities are the ones that need access to government 
services the most.
    We are proud of the work we are doing. Certainly, a lot 
more needs to be done yet. We will be happy to provide a fuller 
briefing to your staff if you are interested.
    Ms. Lee. Just very quickly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for 
yielding the gentleman four minutes. I do want to ask, how 
successful?
    Mr. Sessions. The gentleman is recognized for five minutes 
more.
    Ms. Lee. Yes. OK. I just wanted to ask, to that same 
question, how successful you think you have been so far in 
implementing this plan.
    Mr. Hashmi. In some cases, we are very excited about the 
progress. In fact, we are ahead of schedule. Our equity study 
and all the results are actually publicly available on our 
website. If you are interested, you can go to GSA.gov, not only 
take a look at our plan, but also see how we are working 
against that plan.
    Ms. Lee. Thank you. I yield back.
    Mr. Sessions. Thank you very much. It is important for me 
and, I think, Mr. Mfume, when we have these hearings to allow 
each of the Members the proper amount of time for them to 
always ask the questions, receive an answer back, and so I hope 
that the gentleman would recognize how important this is. 
Before I ask my first question, I am going to come to the 
gentleman--I am very happy doing this--for a second round of 
questions. The gentleman is recognized for five minutes.
    Mr. Mfume. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You are gracious. This 
is not being lost on this hearing. I do appreciate it. I do 
want to say two quick things. I want to associate myself with 
the remarks from the gentlewoman from Pennsylvania, 
particularly as it relates to the inherent bias, Mr. St. 
Pierre, and facial recognition technology, and to ask in that 
regard, since it has been four years since you undertook the 
review in 2019, could you provide this Committee with what has 
been accomplished or what has taken place to make that facial 
recognition less biased in the last four years? That would be 
helpful.
    Mr. St. Pierre.. Yes, thank you for the question. So NIST's 
role in this is to, in that particular instance of measuring 
and testing those algorithms, is to do just that, is to measure 
the performance of the algorithms because we realize how 
important it is to understand how they perform and how they 
perform whether they include bias in their determinations, in 
their outcomes.
    NIST is not directly involved in the development of these. 
These are developed by outside organizations, industry. So, we 
believe that our testing helps advance the technology and helps 
to improve it so that we can avoid and decrease the amount of 
bias in these algorithms, which is what we have seen over time 
that our tests since 2019 have shown a decrease in the amount 
of bias. This does depend on the data you are using and the use 
case, et cetera, but the encouraging thing is that over time, 
we have seen, through our testing, improvements in the 
technology.
    Mr. Mfume. Yes, I would just like to get a summary of the 
assessment. Since you test, test, test, I am sure there is an 
assessment after each test that are pointing in one direction 
or another. If you could just provide a summary of that, that 
would be helpful. At least it would assure me that there is 
progress being made as a result of your testing for certain 
things at NIST.
    Mr. Mfume. The other thing is that I cannot get away from 
this whole issue of taxpayer dollars and what is lost as a 
result of what we have seen over the last five years or so. The 
government is talking about cutting back on SNAP benefits for 
very needy and poor families. And all I can think about is how 
much money has been lost as a result of people siphoning off 
money by deliberately and, in some instances fraudulently, 
misrepresenting the truth. That really concerns me because we 
don't know what that number is, but I know where those needy 
people are, and I know the fight that it has taken to make sure 
that dollars get to them who deserve it. I am concerned about 
the bad guys. I keep talking about them because I think they 
are everywhere and, you know, the fraud that we have seen in 
the PPP program and EIDL, which this Committee, the full 
Committee has been overseeing, is alarming.
    And now I have got confidence in Administrator Carnahan. I 
think she is doing the right thing and doing it in the right 
way to save taxpayer dollars. But I just cannot underscore 
enough the fact that I feel like a heist has taken place, and 
nobody knows who that masked man was that rode off into the 
sunset, and whoever it was rode off with a lot of money by 
misrepresentation and misrepresenting the truth. So, Mr. 
Chairman, thank you for graciously giving me some extra time. I 
yield back, and I thank you very much.
    Mr. Sessions. Thank you very much. Does the gentlewoman 
from the District of Columbia seek time?
    Ms. Norton. I do, Mr. Chairman.
    Mr. Sessions. The gentlewoman is recognized for five 
minutes.
    Ms. Norton. I thank you. I want to punctuate that GSA's 
misrepresentation with Login.gov plagued both administrations. 
The GSA inspector general's findings about Login.gov staff 
actions are troubling, but under this administration, GSA has 
been proactive about addressing these issues from the moment 
GSA leaders were made aware that some staff had been 
misrepresenting Login.gov's capabilities and customers. Mr. 
Hashmi, please describe the steps GSA took upon discovering 
this problem?
    Mr. Hashmi. Thank you, Congresswoman. It is an honor to 
meet you in person and to testify before you. I appreciate the 
question. As I mentioned in my opening testimony and to 
reiterate here, these misrepresentations represent the worst in 
how a government should operate. I take this very seriously. I 
have been a public servant for most of my professional career, 
and as soon as I became aware of these misrepresentations 
earlier last year, I took immediate action.
    Here's the list of actions that I have taken, and the 
overall GSA management leadership team has taken. First, my 
immediate focus and priority was to inform our customers. We 
want to make sure that we are proactive, and we make sure that 
our customers understand exactly what the capabilities of our 
products are so they can make informed decisions and are not 
basing those decisions on misrepresentations that we have made. 
Not only our customers, but working with our Office of General 
Counsel, immediately informed the Inspector General's Office as 
well as other stakeholders, including the Technology 
Modernization Fund Board.
    Second, I wanted to make sure that we get into the heart of 
exactly what happened, and if there are people who knowingly 
misrepresented this situation, are held accountable. As a 
result, we initiated a management inquiry and started to 
analyze the facts. Those facts subsequently showed that certain 
members of the Login team did, indeed, misrepresent 
intentionally, and as a result, we immediately initiated an 
employee disciplinary inquiry. As a result, all those who 
misled intentionally, that we are aware of, are no longer 
employed by the Agency.
    Third, it is clear from the IG's report, as well as our 
internal management review, that internal controls have to be 
put in place so that this doesn't happen again. One of the key 
internal controls that we put in place was establishing a 
separate division within the Office of General Counsel that is 
not pressured to deliver, but only be accountable for 
compliance and oversight. That division is now responsible for 
reviewing every single document that we sign with our 
customers, every single communication that the program makes, 
and, in fact, they are providing those services not just for 
Login.gov, but all of technology transformation service.
    By having this internal control and, of course, building on 
that, as I brought a new leadership, I immediately removed the 
existing Login.gov director, brought in new leadership. That 
leadership, as soon as they were brought on board, my first 
task for them was to conduct a full top-to-bottom review of the 
program to include personnel, contracts, finances, billing, and 
much more. And then last, I want to again reiterate my 
appreciation for the work that the IG has done and their 
recommendations because those recommendations also form a good 
basis for us to continue to take strong action in this case.
    Ms. Norton. Well, Mr. Hashmi, did these mitigating actions 
begin before the OIG published their recent report?
    Mr. Hashmi. Yes, ma'am. These actions were initiated 
immediately upon learning about this issue earlier last year. 
We have been taking these actions deliberately over the last 
year, and we will continue to build on them as we incorporate 
the OIG's recommendations.
    Ms. Norton. Mr. Hashmi, at GSA, for example, we assigned 
the director of Login.gov in February 2022. Since leadership 
learned of the concerns with Login.gov, the office has 
undergone extensive turnover in leadership. What is GSA's plan 
to ensure long-term stability in this new leadership?
    Mr. Hashmi. Thank you for that question, ma'am. My first 
and main priority is to bring a culture of accountability and 
transparency to this office and in everything we do. That is 
why as soon as the IG made the report public, I shared a copy 
of it with every single employee within my charge because I 
want to make sure that everyone who works for me understands 
that our responsibility goes beyond just getting the job done, 
but also doing it in full transparency, with accountability.
    To your question, ma'am, we have seen turnover. However, I 
remind staff that the reason why we are here is to serve the 
American people. One of the things that we need to do is to 
continue to hire aggressively people who not just have the 
technology skills, but bring the right ethical and 
accountability framework to the role and we continue to do so.
    Ms. Norton. Thank you. I see my time has expired.
    Mr. Sessions. Does the gentlewoman seek additional time?
    Ms. Norton. I would like additional time.
    Mr. Sessions. The gentlewoman will be recognized for five 
minutes.
    Ms. Norton. Soon after Dan Lopez became the new director of 
Login.gov in September 2022, he began conducting a top-to-
bottom review of the office to determine other potential 
improvements. Mr. Hashmi, how is GSA supporting Mr. Lopez's 
review?
    Mr. Hashmi. Thank you for that question, ma'am. One of my 
first actions as soon as he came on board was to direct him to 
conduct this top-to-bottom review. I have also made resources 
available to him to conduct a full analysis of people with 
expertise in contracting with--on finance and budgeting, to 
making sure that he has resources, not just in his area of 
expertise, which is technology and management, but a full 
breadth of capabilities that he needs to evaluate this program 
fully.
    We are working very closely with our Office of Chief 
Financial Officer as well as our Office of General Counsel to 
evaluate all aspects of that program. We will continue to 
provide that support, and as results become available, we take 
action immediately. As a result, one of the internal controls 
we have put in place is that all contracts that are managed by 
the Technology Transformation Service have a review that my 
staff and the Office of the Acquisition Services, the Federal 
Acquisition Service conducts.
    With this independent review, we want to make sure that all 
contract actions meet the Federal acquisition regulation and 
appropriate regulations, policy, and law. Similarly, we are 
taking similar actions to make sure that we are managing our 
human resources appropriately, our finances, budgets and 
forecasting appropriately and, again, continue to communicate 
transparency with our customers in collaboration with our 
Office of General Counsel.
    So, to answer your question, ma'am, significant resources 
are being put into it because this is my top priority. I want 
to make sure that this program, which is so important for so 
much of the work the Americans expect from their government. 
The success of this program is paramount for the government to 
deliver digital services to their constituents. We want to make 
sure that this is done in transparency and full accountability 
because in this particular case, we feel very strongly that 
this program has a right philosophy to add value to the 
American people, and we want to make sure that we have the 
right accountability in place so that we can continue to do so.
    Ms. Norton. Finally, Mr. Hashmi, what steps are GSA and Mr. 
Lopez taking to change the Login.gov work culture from one that 
allowed this misrepresentation to one that demands transparency 
and integrity?
    Mr. Hashmi. Thank you, again, Congresswoman. As I 
mentioned, some of the controls that we put in place with our 
Office of Chief Financial Officer, General Counsel, put 
required controls in the process so that misrepresentations are 
caught before they are made. While we are very proud that we 
have been able to bring in leadership with the right focus on 
ethics, transparency, and accountability, we cannot always rely 
and mistakes sometimes can get made. So, we want to make sure 
that the process is in place to protect those things from 
happening, No. 1.
    No. 2, Mr. Lopez has already also been looking to make sure 
that the right people are brought in for the right roles. One 
of the challenges that he has identified, and we are happy to 
provide additional information to your office at your interest, 
is that we need more experts who are not just technologists, 
but experts in fraud management, and those skills are very 
different. And so, we are starting to build a small team of 
folks who have previously not only litigated, but processed 
fraud cases so that we can really understand how do we build 
the products that are actually designed to prevent those cases 
from happening. Those are examples of him taking initiative to 
identify the gaps that exist and then to continue to fill those 
gaps as he moves forward.
    Ms. Norton. Thank you very much. I appreciate the extra 
time, Mr. Chairman.
    Mr. Sessions. I thank the gentlewoman for taking her time 
to be at this important Subcommittee and respect her questions. 
I will now yield myself such time as I consume as the last 
questioner, and I want to really relate this. I know it is a 
Mr. Hashmi show today, it has turned into that, but, really, 
all three of you could answer this.
    Looking back at it, I wonder how prudent it is to look at 
on a case-by-case, which means, I think, one at a time, anybody 
that was currently in the system, whether they had come through 
the filter improperly, they might be the wrong person, or view 
it, or--can you talk about how you got a database. How you vet 
that now based upon what we know? Mr. St. Pierre?
    Mr. St. Pierre.. Yes. Thank you for the question. In this 
role, our role is to develop the standards and guidance that 
are used to develop identity management systems. We have no 
oversight or enforcement role, so I really couldn't speak to 
how that would be addressed.
    Mr. Sessions. Mr. Hashmi?
    Mr. Hashmi. Thank you, Chairman. I wholeheartedly agree 
with the need to ensure that we continue to invest in fraud 
mitigation capabilities within the Federal Government. I want 
to reiterate our strong belief that Login.gov is a strong 
product and it has many fraud mitigation controls already in 
place. For example, one of the gentlemen had raised a question 
of two-factor authentication. Login.gov requires two-factor 
authentication in all cases. We also do controls such as phone 
and address verification, making sure that the device the user 
is using is actually tied to them by name. Many other controls 
exist.
    The key failing here and the key thing that prevents us 
from achieving that IAL2, the primary reason is continuing to 
investigate whether biometric technology is the right thing to 
implement at this point in the government. However, let me just 
be very clear. I want to say it for the record. IAL2 
compliance--Login.gov does not meet IAL2 compliance. It hasn't 
ever. The misrepresentations are absolutely unacceptable. We 
strongly believe in the product. We believe in the fraud 
capabilities the product already offers. For that reason, we 
will continue to invest in those capabilities.
    I mentioned one of the things that we have implemented 
recently is a pilot program to allow Americans to prove their 
identity in person, partnering with the U.S. Postal Service, 
because there is nothing more secure than asserting your 
identity in person, so in certain circumstances that option 
becomes available. These are the kinds of investments we will 
continue to make because, ultimately, the goal should remain to 
create a service that creates access, protects people's privacy 
and has adequate and strong fraud prevention controls built in.
    Mr. Sessions. OK. Well, that was the next question I was 
going to ask, but let me go back. I'm not making my point here. 
You have got people who are in Login.gov, and we believe that 
we oversold what you have done to make sure they are who they 
are, right? You told people you used these processes. Are you 
going back to the existing people that are in the data bases, 
and then when you get these techniques, running that against 
these people? If not, I mean, I still don't understand. I think 
some of the people in the data base, can't tell you how many, 
might not be necessarily who they are, or you may want to 
double check on them. I did not hear you. That was my question. 
Did you hear my question?
    Mr. Mfume. I did.
    Mr. Sessions. OK. What am I saying wrong to get the answer?
    Mr. Mfume. I don't know, it is a matter of framing it. We 
all hear it differently, but I trust that Mr. Hashmi, who has 
become the center of this discussion, probably has a way to 
respond.
    Mr. Sessions. OK. People who are in the data base today, 
you don't know if your eggs are fresh. You don't know if that 
is really who it is, because you may have had some frailties. 
Are you going to check those that are in there today against 
some system that you then develop, reassessing the customer? 
That is what I am asking.
    Mr. Hashmi. Yes, thank you, Chairman, and I do apologize 
for perhaps not understanding.
    Mr. Sessions. My fault. It is not yours.
    Mr. Hashmi. Well, let me just say this, sir. All the 
controls that I mentioned earlier, we are checking all of the 
accounts against them constantly. If I may be allowed, sir, 
again, the key thing that we do not implement today is facial 
recognition. Because of that lack of, you know, that 
capability, we have no mechanism to test these identities with 
facial recognition. However, we employed third-party data 
sources. We worked with state DMV offices. We work with many 
different data sources like that to ensure exactly what you and 
I agree needs to be done, which is to ensure that we identify 
if there is any fraud that exists in the system and take care 
of it immediately.
    All the agencies that we work with for identity 
verification, through our communication since last year, we 
have made sure that they understand exactly which accounts have 
come into their systems and they have independent ways to 
validate and mechanisms so that those individuals can be 
subsequently vetted again. So, all the controls that I 
mentioned--address verification, phone verification--we 
constantly employ all of them as well as third-party-based data 
sources that can allow us with an independent view of who is 
saying what they are. We do that every day, and all these 
identities are constantly validated through all these controls.
    Mr. Sessions. Good. That makes sense to me. I think that 
answered my question. The last question I had, which I am not 
sure really what the answer might be. But looking across the 
free enterprise commercial space, is there a best practice and 
is that the same as the government, or do you think someone has 
a lens, a camera, a process that we just don't want to get at, 
or can't get at, or unwilling to pay it, or are we leading 
edge? That is, I guess, is the question?
    Mr. St. Pierre.. So, what I would say is we work with 
industry, the leading experts in industry, government and other 
agencies, and for IAL2, there are a number of ways to meet 
IAL2. One is a physical comparison that can be either done in 
person or remote. One is a biometric and one is a compensating 
control that would have to be documented and justified. And 
also, I would say that with respect to our draft version that 
is out, one of the things we have explicitly called for is more 
information and input from the industry, the experts, if there 
are ways to meet the same level of security that we feel is 
required to protect the Americans' data, that would meet that 
same level of security in a non-biometric fashion. So, that is 
part of our call in the draft, but the draft, I mean, the IAL2, 
again, does have three different ways to meet the standard.
    Mr. Sessions. All right. I want to thank each of you for 
being here. I want to thank your colleagues who have joined 
you. I see a good bit of recognition in the employee body that 
is behind you that they believe that they understand what we 
are trying to do today, that they understand the responsibility 
to be truthful about what they do. And it is perhaps a lesson 
to all of us, but I want to thank you, so thank you to 
everybody. I don't know whether, sir, you would wish to have 
closing, thank yous and comments, but the gentleman is 
recognized.
    Mr. Mfume. Yes. Thank you, again, Mr. Chairman. I think it 
has been a good hearing. I want to thank all of the witnesses. 
And, Mr. Hashmi, I will go out on a limb here and say that I 
really trust your sincerity about wanting to end this. I could 
hear in your heart the sort of pain that is there because this 
is existing, and I want to commend you on immediately taking 
action when you got the information. And we are looking forward 
to the day when fraud mitigation and IAL2 compliance and 
everything else is sort of secondary.
    But there was one thing I did hear that I am particularly 
interested in, also based on one of the questions that the 
Chairman asked, and that is that you are not just looking at 
fraud mitigation, but you are looking to bring in people who 
have actually prosecuted fraud and who can identify it in an 
early stage. That is very significant. I want to commend you on 
it. And as I said before, I have got a great deal of trust in 
Ms. Carnahan and her leadership there. We just don't want to 
relive the nightmare all over again, I guess, that is what we 
are all seeing here.
    And Ms. Ochoa, we, in this Committee and Subcommittee, get 
to deal with a lot of inspector generals, as you might 
understand. I am just glad to see somebody other than a man 
sitting in that chair and to know that there is some gender 
equity taking place, particularly in that profession because I 
oftentimes believe that in many instances, the best man for the 
job is a woman. So, thank you, and I am just hoping that your 
example is replicated. You did a great job on this. I am still 
a little troubled about the redactions, and that is why I asked 
the question about the Justice Department, but we can deal with 
that at another point in time.
    I just want to thank all of you again and your work also, 
Mr. St. Pierre, at NIST, and yield back to the Chairman so that 
we might move forward to the next phase of this. Thank you, Mr. 
Chair.
    Mr. Sessions. The gentleman yields back his time and I 
thank the gentleman. So, please accept the same comments from 
me, the thanks to each of you. The need for follow up will 
occur. It will be quite direct and specific. We will give the 
GSA Administrator that opportunity to know that ahead of time. 
It will be done together, and it will be done on behalf of this 
Subcommittee.
    With that said, without objection, all Members will have 
five legislative days within which to submit materials and 
submit additional written questions for the witnesses, which 
will be forwarded to the witnesses for their response. It is 
our expectation that you will respond to those questions.
    Mr. Sessions. Please know that we appreciate and respect 
what you have done today and thank you for your service to the 
people of the United States of America.
    This ends our hearing. Without further objection, the 
Subcommittee stands adjourned.
    [Whereupon, at 4:19 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

                                 [all] 

