
 - EVALUATING HIGH-RISK SECURITY VULNERABILITIES AT OUR NATION'S PORTS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]



  EVALUATING HIGH-RISK SECURITY VULNERABILITIES AT OUR NATION'S PORTS

=======================================================================

                                HEARING

                               before the

                            SUBCOMMITTEE ON
                  TRANSPORTATION AND MARITIME SECURITY

                                 of the

                     COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
                        HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

                    ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

                             FIRST SESSION

                               __________

                              MAY 10, 2023

                               __________

                           Serial No. 118-10

                               __________

       Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security
                                     





                [GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]



                                     

        Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov

                               __________
                     

                 U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

53-047 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2023













                     COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

                 Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee, Chairman

Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi, 
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                  Ranking Member
Michael Guest, Mississippi           Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           Eric Swalwell, California
August Pfluger, Texas                J. Luis Correa, California
Andrew R. Garbarino, New York        Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island
Nick LaLota, New York                Glenn Ivey, Maryland
Mike Ezell, Mississippi              Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         Robert Garcia, California
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Dina Titus, Nevada
Elijah Crane, Arizona

                      Stephen Siao, Staff Director
                  Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
                       Natalie Nixon, Chief Clerk
                     Sean Jones, Legislative Clerk

                                 ------                                

          SUBCOMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND MARITIME SECURITY

                  Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida, Chairman

Clay Higgins, Louisiana              Shri Thanedar, Michigan, Ranking 
Nick LaLota, New York                    Member
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee (ex     Robert Garcia, California
    officio)                         Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi 
                                         (ex officio)

                  Vacancy, Subcommittee Staff Director
           Alex Marston, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director
                  Halle Sarkisian, Subcommittee Clerk








                            C O N T E N T S

                              ----------                              
                                                                   Page

                               Statements

The Honorable Carlos A. Gimenez, a Representative in Congress 
  From the State of Florida, and Chairman, Subcommittee on 
  Transportation and Maritime Security:
  Oral Statement.................................................     1
  Prepared Statement.............................................     2
The Honorable Shri Thanedar, a Representative in Congress From 
  the State of Michigan, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on 
  Transportation and Maritime Security:
  Oral Statement.................................................     3
  Prepared Statement.............................................     4
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress 
  From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on 
  Homeland Security:
  Prepared Statement.............................................     4

                               Witnesses

Rear Admiral Wayne R. Arguin, Jr., Assistant Commandant for 
  Prevention Policy, United States Coast Guard, U.S. Department 
  of Homeland Security:
  Oral Statement.................................................     6
  Prepared Statement.............................................     7
Mr. Eric Goldstein, Executive Assistant Director, Cybersecurity 
  and Infrastructure Security Agency, U.S. Department of Homeland 
  Security:
  Oral Statement.................................................    11
  Prepared Statement.............................................    12
Mr. John ``Neal'' Latta, Assistant Administrator, Enrollment 
  Services and Vetting Programs, Transportation Security 
  Administration, U.S. Department of Homeland Security:
  Oral Statement.................................................    15
  Prepared Statement.............................................    16

                                Appendix

Questions From Honorable Robert Garcia for Wayne R. Arguin, Jr...    33
Questions From Chairman Carlos Gimenez for Eric Goldstein........    33









 
  EVALUATING HIGH-RISK SECURITY VULNERABILITIES AT OUR NATION'S PORTS

                              ----------                              


                        Wednesday, May 10, 2023

             U.S. House of Representatives,
                    Committee on Homeland Security,
                        Subcommittee on Transportation and 
                                         Maritime Security,
                                                    Washington, DC.
    The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:02 p.m., in 
room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Carlos A. Gimenez 
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
    Present: Representatives Gimenez, Higgins of Louisiana, 
LaLota, Lee of Florida, Thanedar, Payne, and Robert Garcia of 
California.
    Mr. Gimenez. The Committee on Homeland Security, 
Subcommittee on Transportation and Maritime Security will come 
to order.
    The purpose of this hearing is to receive testimony from 
the distinguished panel of witnesses who will speak to high-
risk security vulnerabilities at our Nation's ports and actions 
Congress can take to improve port security and ensure public 
safety.
    I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
    This subcommittee's hearing today will discuss security 
vulnerabilities at our Nation's maritime ports. Ports are 
essential to our way of life in the United States. The United 
States is a maritime nation with 361 commercial ports, 25,000 
miles of navigable channels, and 95,000 miles of shoreline.
    Maritime shipping is a critical component to our Nation's 
economy. Approximately 90 percent of imports and exports enter 
and exit the United States by ship, generating over $4 trillion 
of economic activity every year.
    Maritime ports are also essential to our military's ability 
to respond to threats and project power overseas. During 
Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm, the Navy's Military 
Sealift Command delivered more than 12 million tons of 
equipment, vehicles, and material facilitating a massive 
coalition force that ejected Saddam Hussein's forces from 
Kuwait. Our military cannot operate for sustained periods of 
time without functioning, secure maritime ports at home that 
facilitate the strategic sealift mission.
    Additionally, maritime ports are vital assets to our 
communities. Waterborne commerce supports 28.5 million direct 
and indirect jobs across the United States. As a former mayor 
of Miami-Dade, home to the port of Miami, I understand 
personally how important ports can be to their local 
communities.
    Maritime ports present soft targets to our adversaries, and 
large-scale operational disruptions at a major port could have 
a debilitating effect on our country. Therefore, it is critical 
that we understand and address the security vulnerabilities at 
our maritime ports.
    This subcommittee has already begun work on this topic. Our 
subcommittee has engaged with DHS, the FBI, and the Department 
of Transportation to ensure resources are being appropriately 
allocated based on the evolving port threat landscape.
    Last month the subcommittee heard from officials 
representing four different port authorities who discussed the 
challenges that their organizations are facing and 
opportunities to mitigate those challenges. Among the 
challenges we heard about from this panel was the alarming 
potential capabilities of nation-states, in particular the 
People's Republic of China, and non-state actors to collect 
intelligence, steal sensitive data, and disrupt operations at 
our ports.
    I'm especially concerned about the cranes and other 
equipment and technology in use at ports across the United 
States that are manufactured by the PRC state home entities and 
the opportunity for back-door access to sensitive port 
infrastructure. I have long advocated for Federal agencies with 
responsibilities for port cybersecurity to do more to address 
potential cybersecurity threats related to Chinese-made 
equipment and technology.
    Last year I introduced legislation that limits the 
operation of foreign cranes and software at U.S. ports. We must 
remain vigilant in our fight against potential catastrophic 
events to our port infrastructure.
    Today we are joined by leaders from the U.S. Coast Guard, 
the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, and the 
Transportation Security Administration, who are leading the 
Federal Government's efforts to protect our Nation's maritime 
ports. I look forward to discussing this important topic with 
our distinguished witnesses.
    [The statement of Chairman Gimenez follows:]

                Statement of Chairman Carlos A. Gimenez
                              May 10, 2023
    This subcommittee's hearing today will discuss security 
vulnerabilities at our Nation's maritime ports.
    Ports are essential to our way of life in the United States.
    The United States is a maritime nation, with 361 commercial ports 
25,000 miles of navigable channels, and 95,000 miles of shoreline.
    Maritime shipping is a critical component of our Nation's economy.
    Approximately 90 percent of imports and exports enter and exit the 
United States by ship, generating over $4 trillion of economic activity 
each year.
    Maritime ports are also essential to our military's ability to 
respond to threats and project power overseas.
    During Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm, the Navy's 
Military Sealift Command delivered more than 12 million tons equipment, 
vehicles, and materiel, facilitating the massive coalition force that 
ejected Saddam Hussein's forces from Kuwait.
    Our military cannot operate for sustained periods of time without 
functioning, secure maritime ports at home that facilitate the 
strategic sealift mission.
    Additionally, maritime ports are vital assets to our communities.
    Waterborne commerce supports 28.5 million direct and indirect jobs 
across the United States.
    As the former Mayor of Miami Dade, home to the Port of Miami, I 
understand personally how important ports can be to their local 
communities.
    Maritime ports present soft targets to our adversaries, and large-
scale operational disruptions at a major port could have a debilitating 
effect on our country.
    Therefore, it is critical that we understand and address the 
security vulnerabilities of our maritime ports.
    This subcommittee has already begun its work on this topic.
    Our subcommittee has engaged with DHS, the FBI, and the Department 
of Transportation to ensure resources are being appropriately allocated 
based on the evolving port threat landscape.
    Last month, the subcommittee heard from officials representing four 
different port authorities who discussed the challenges their 
organizations are facing and opportunities to mitigate these 
challenges.
    Among the challenges we heard about from this panel was the 
alarming potential capabilities of nation-states--in particular the 
People's Republic of China--and non-state actors to collect 
intelligence, steal sensitive data, and disrupt operations at our 
ports.
    I am especially concerned about the cranes and other equipment and 
technology in use at ports across the United States that are 
manufactured by PRC state-owned entities and the opportunity for 
backdoor access to sensitive port infrastructure.
    I have long advocated for Federal agencies with responsibility for 
port cybersecurity to do more to address potential cybersecurity 
threats related to Chinese-made equipment and technology.
    Last year, I introduced legislation that limits the operation of 
foreign cranes and software at U.S. ports.
    We must remain vigilant in our fight against potential catastrophic 
events to our port infrastructure.
    Today, we are joined by leaders from the U.S Coast Guard, the 
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, and the 
Transportation Security Administration, who are leading the Federal 
Government's efforts to protect our Nation's maritime ports.
    I look forward to discussing this important topic with our 
distinguished witnesses.
    I now recognize the Ranking Member, the gentleman from Michigan, 
Mr. Thanedar, for his opening statement.

    Mr. Gimenez. I now recognize the Ranking Member, the 
gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Thanedar for his opening 
statement.
    Mr. Thanedar. Thank you, Chairman Gimenez, for calling this 
important hearing.
    Thank you to our witnesses for joining us here today.
    Last month we had the opportunity to meet with port 
operators, including from the port of Detroit in my district, 
my home district, regarding the security of our Nation's 
maritime ports. Today I'm eager to hear from our witnesses 
about how Federal agencies work together to protect our ports 
and safeguard the free flow of commerce.
    More than 99 percent of America's cargo from overseas 
arrives by maritime ports. That represents billions of dollars 
of goods moving through the port each and every day. It is 
vital for our national security and our economic future that we 
invest in protecting our sea ports from attacks.
    American and foreign ports have been victims of cyber 
attacks that have halted the movement of goods and costs 
millions of dollars. Additionally, the COVID-19 pandemic led to 
many challenges for ports across the Nation, including staffing 
shortages, supply chain issues, and massive backlog of goods 
awaiting processing.
    Today the maritime industry has made great progress to 
increase cyber protection and recover from backlogs, but more 
can be done. I'm eager to hear more about the Coast Guard and 
CISA's efforts to expand cybersecurity measures at U.S. ports. 
Now is the time to invest in cyber readiness across essential 
transportation industries, as more cyber attacks on our ports 
and transportation systems could have devastating consequences.
    I'm also interested to learn how the Coast Guard and TSA 
work together to administer the Transportation Worker 
Identification Credentials, or TWIC, program. Workers are the 
most valuable assets our ports have, and ensuring they can be 
vetted and receive credentials in a timely manner is critical 
to maintaining efficient and secure operations at our ports.
    The U.S. Coast Guard, C-I-S-A--CISA, and TSA must work 
together to safeguard America's maritime ports. We, in 
Congress, must support that mission and deliver the resources 
needed to invest in critical security advances.
    I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today about 
what they need to carry out their mission effectively.
    I thank the Chairman, and I yield back.
    [The statement of Ranking Member Thanedar follows:]

               Statement of Ranking Member Shri Thanedar
                              May 10, 2023
    Last month, we had the opportunity to meet with port operators, 
including from the Port of Detroit in my district, regarding the 
security of our Nation's maritime ports. Today, I am eager to hear from 
our witnesses about how Federal agencies work together to protect our 
ports and safeguard the free flow of commerce. More than 99 percent of 
America's cargo from overseas arrives by maritime port. That represents 
billions of dollars of goods moving through ports each and every day.
    It is vital for our national security and our economic future that 
we invest in protecting our seaports from attacks. American and foreign 
ports have been victims of cyber attacks that have halted the movement 
of goods and cost millions of dollars. Additionally, the COVID-19 
pandemic led to many challenges for ports across the Nation, including 
staffing shortages, supply chain issues, and massive backlogs of goods 
awaiting processing. Today, the maritime industry has made great 
progress to increase cyber protections and recover from backlogs. But 
more can be done.
    I am eager to hear more about the Coast Guard and CISA's efforts to 
expand cybersecurity measures at U.S. ports. Now is the time to invest 
in cyber readiness across essential transportation industries, as more 
cyber attacks on our ports and transportation systems could have 
devastating consequences.
    I am also interested to learn how the Coast Guard and TSA work 
together to administer the Transportation Worker Identification 
Credential, or TWIC program. Workers are the most valuable assets our 
ports have, and ensuring they can be vetted and receive credentials in 
a timely manner is critical to maintaining efficient and secure 
operations at our ports.
    The U.S. Coast Guard, CISA, and TSA must work together to safeguard 
America's maritime ports. We in Congress must support that mission and 
deliver the resources needed to invest in critical security advances. I 
look forward to hearing from our witnesses today about what they need 
to carry out their missions effectively.

    Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Ranking Member Thanedar.
    All Members of the committee are reminded that opening 
statements may be submitted for the record.
    [The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]

             Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
                              May 10, 2023
    Seaports are key drivers of the U.S. economy and keeping them 
secure is vital to the American way of life. We must ensure that the 
Department of Homeland Security and its component agencies continue to 
secure U.S. ports against evolving threats, in coordination with port 
owners and operators and other stakeholders.
    In 2018, activities at U.S. ports supported more than 31 million 
U.S. jobs and generated $5.4 trillion of total economic value, 
representing 26 percent of the Nation's economy. As we saw during the 
COVID-19 pandemic, any disruptions or delays in operations at ports are 
felt throughout society. Successful attacks against ports and the 
maritime transportation system can have ripple effects throughout our 
economy and drastic impacts to our national security. Indeed, we have 
seen the impact of such attacks in the past.
    In 2018, for example, a cyber attack against Danish shipping 
company A.P. Moller-Maersk led to a shutdown of the Port of Los 
Angeles' largest cargo terminal along with several others around the 
world. The attack affected global shipping operations for weeks and 
cost Maersk as much as $300 million. Cyber threat actors continue to 
grow more sophisticated, and our security agencies must continue to 
work to stay a step ahead.
    We must ensure the U.S. Coast Guard and the Cybersecurity and 
Infrastructure Security Agency are appropriately resourced and develop 
the necessary expertise to counter the latest cyber threats, including 
by issuing timely, actionable guidance and information to port owners 
and operators. The Coast Guard and CISA's efforts must be guided by a 
clear-eyed evaluation of the most pressing threats to the maritime 
industry based on the latest intelligence--not politics.
    Additionally, DHS security programs must continue to prioritize the 
ability of ports to operate efficiently day in and day out. For 
example, the Transportation Security Administration must continue to 
evolve its processes for workers to obtain Transportation Worker 
Identification Credentials in a timely manner. Workers rely on 
obtaining TWIC cards for their livelihood, and delays in vetting and 
processing applications can have drastic impacts on not just individual 
workers but on ports that need to hire staff quickly in response to 
market demands. TSA's rollout last August of an option for TWIC holders 
to renew their cards on-line is a major step in the right direction.
    The Department must continue to prioritize its efforts to protect 
the free flow of commerce through our Nation's ports given their 
significance to our national interest. I look forward to continuing 
this committee's oversight of DHS's port security efforts.

    Mr. Gimenez. I am pleased to have the distinguished panel 
of witnesses before us today on this critical topic.
    I ask that our witnesses please rise and raise their right 
hand.
    [Witnesses sworn.]
    Mr. Gimenez. You may be seated.
    Let the record reflect that the witnesses responded in the 
affirmative.
    Thank you again.
    I would like--I would now like to formally introduce our 
witnesses.
    Rear Admiral Wayne Arguin Junior, currently serves as the 
assistant commandant for prevention policy with the United 
States Coast Guard. In this capacity, he's responsible for the 
development of national policy, standards, and programs 
promoting maritime security and safety.
    Prior to his current assignment, Rear Admiral Arguin served 
as the director of inspection and compliance at Coast Guard 
Headquarters. His previous operational assignments include 
sector commander, Sector New Orleans. He also served as 
executive officer of Marine Safety Office Memphis, Tennessee 
and prevention department head at Sector Lower Mississippi 
River.
    Mr. Eric Goldstein serves as the executive assistant 
director for cybersecurity with the Cybersecurity and 
Infrastructure Security Agency, CISA. In this role, Mr. 
Goldstein leads CISA's missions to protect and strengthen 
Federal civilian agencies and the Nation's critical 
infrastructure against cyber threats.
    Previously, Mr. Goldstein was the head of cybersecurity 
policy, strategy, and regulation at Goldman Sachs where he led 
the firm's cybersecurity risk management program. From 2013 to 
2017, Mr. Goldstein served at CISA's precursor agency, the 
National Protection and Programs Directorate, in various roles, 
including senior advisor to the assistant secretary for 
cybersecurity and senior counselor to the under secretary.
    Mr. Neal Latta serves as the assistant administrator for 
enrollment services and vetting programs, ESVP, for the 
Transportation Security Administration. Mr. Latta leads ESVP in 
establishing and managing program operations, technology, 
budget, and end-to-end integration of TSA front-line vetting 
mission priorities.
    Mr. Latta has over 25 years of Federal Government 
experience in implementing new program initiatives with the 
emphasis on biometrics and technology. Mr. Latta previously 
served as group chief of the screening and vetting group at the 
National Counterterrorism Center, where he oversaw and directed 
day-to-day operations for counterterrorism and high profile 
screening programs of all persons coming into the United 
States.
    I want to thank all the witnesses for being here today.
    I now recognize Rear Admiral Arguin for 5 minutes to 
summarize his opening statement.

   STATEMENT OF REAR ADMIRAL WAYNE R. ARGUIN, JR., ASSISTANT 
 COMMANDANT FOR PREVENTION POLICY, UNITED STATES COAST GUARD, 
              U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

    Admiral Arguin. Good afternoon, Chairman Gimenez, Ranking 
Member Thanedar, and distinguished Members of the subcommittee. 
I'm honored to be here today to discuss the top priority for 
the United States Coast Guard, protecting the Marine 
Transportation System, or MTS. I ask that my written testimony 
be entered into the record.
    Mr. Gimenez. So done.
    Admiral Arguin. Our national security and economic 
prosperity are inextricably linked to a safe and efficient 
marine transportation system, or MTS. The vast system of ports 
and waterways that make up the MTS support $5.4 trillion of 
annual economic activity, accounts for the employment of more 
than 30 million Americans, and enables critical sealift 
capabilities allowing our armed forces to project power around 
the globe.
    The MTS is being shaped by three enduring drivers: First is 
the demand for increased capacity, from bigger ships and deeper 
channels to new industries harnessing our maritime advantage.
    Second is the pressure to reduce the transportation's--
reduce transportation's environmental footprint and promote 
sustainability.
    The only way that these meet--we meet these first two 
demands is the third driver: The introduction of new and 
complex technologies. We call these three drivers the triple 
challenge because together they create a far more complex 
operating environment.
    The Coast Guard is uniquely positioned to face this triple 
challenge and manage risks in the MTS. At all times, we are a 
military service, a Federal law enforcement agency, a 
regulatory body, a co-sector risk management agency, a first 
responder, and a member of the U.S. intelligence community. We 
work across multiple levels of industry and government to 
assess security vulnerabilities within the MTS, determine those 
risks, and development mitigation strategies.
    This layered approach from the local to the international 
level is critical due to the size, diversity, and 
interconnectedness of the MTS.
    Security assessments start with individual vessels and 
facilities. They are required by Federal regulation to conduct 
personalized security assessments, prepare an assessment 
report, and submit that report to the Coast Guard. We have 
boots on deck in the ports across the country conducting on-
scene compliance activities, leading security exercises, and 
engaging with the port community.
    At the regional level, area maritime security committees 
are comprised of Government and maritime industry leaders. 
Their collaborative development of an area maritime security 
plan ensures Government and industry security measures are 
coordinated to prevent and/or respond to a transportation 
security incident in our ports.
    Above these regional efforts, we coordinate national-level 
activities. The relationships we maintain, the information we 
share, and the work we collaborate with across Government and 
industry is foundational to protecting the MTS.
    Finally, our efforts to secure the MTS extend overseas. We 
conduct in-country foreign port assessments and apply 
international maritime organization standards to assess the 
effectiveness of security and antiterrorism measures in foreign 
ports and on foreign ships in our ports.
    To support the whole-of-government effort, we apply our 
proven prevention and response framework to prevent or minimize 
disruptions to the MTS in ports around the country. Our 
authorities and capabilities cut across threat vectors, 
allowing operational commanders at the port level to quickly 
evaluate risks, apply resources, and lead coordinated Federal 
responses to all hazards. We also recognize that threats to the 
MTS constantly change and that we must continually evolve as a 
service and collaborate with our partners to address emergent 
needs.
    Protecting MTS is a top priority for the Coast Guard, and I 
recognize it is also a top priority for this Congress. We are 
grateful for the recent appropriations that help us safeguard 
the MTS, and especially from threats in the cyber domain. We 
will maximize the return on this critical investment.
    I welcome your questions on the vital work the Coast Guard 
does every day to help safeguard America's ports.
    Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today 
and for your continued support of the United States Coast 
Guard.
    [The prepared statement of Admiral Arguin follows:]

           Prepared Statement of Rear Admiral Wayne R. Arguin
                              10 May 2023
                              introduction
    Good afternoon, Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar, and 
distinguished Members of the subcommittee. I am honored to be here 
today to discuss a top priority for the U.S. Coast Guard: protecting 
the marine transportation system (MTS). At all times, the Coast Guard 
is a military service and branch of the U.S. Armed Forces, a Federal 
law enforcement agency, a regulatory body, a co-Sector Risk Management 
Agency, a first responder, and a member of the U.S. intelligence 
community. We are uniquely positioned to ensure the safety, security, 
and stewardship of the maritime domain.
    Since the early days of the Revenue Cutter Service, we have 
protected our Nation's waters, harbors, and ports. While much has 
changed over the centuries--with our missions expanding from sea, air, 
and land into cyber space--our ethos and operational doctrine remain 
steadfast. We employ a risk-based approach to protect the Nation from 
threats in the maritime environment. Regardless of the threat, we 
leverage the full set of our authorities; the ingenuity and leadership 
of our workforce; and the breadth of our military, law enforcement, and 
civil partnerships to protect the Nation, its waterways, and all who 
operate on them.
          the criticality of the marine transportation system
    Our national security and economic prosperity are inextricably 
linked to a safe and efficient MTS. The MTS' complexity and consequence 
to the Nation cannot be overstated. It is an integrated network that 
consists of 25,000 miles of coastal and inland waters and rivers 
serving 361 ports. It is more than ports and waterways. It is cargo and 
cruise ships, passenger ferries, waterfront terminals, offshore 
facilities, buoys and beacons, bridges, and more. The MTS supports $5.4 
trillion of economic activity each year and accounts for the employment 
of more than 30 million Americans. It protects critical national 
security sealift capabilities, enabling U.S. Armed Forces to project 
and maintain power around the globe. We remain laser-focused on the 
safety and security of the MTS as an economic engine and strategic 
imperative, and we continue to serve as the Sentinels envisioned at our 
founding.
          evaluating vulnerabilities--a shared responsibility
    Safeguarding the MTS requires diligent assessment and remediation 
of vulnerabilities. The Coast Guard works across multiple levels of 
industry and government to assess security vulnerabilities, determine 
risk, and develop mitigation strategies. This layered approach--from 
the local to the international level--is critical due to the size, 
diversity, and interconnectedness of the MTS.
Locally: Vessel and Facility Security Assessments
    Security assessments in U.S. ports and waterways start with 
individual vessels, port facilities, and outer continental shelf 
facilities. The Maritime Transportation Security Act (MTSA) regulations 
in 33 CFR 104, 105, and 106 place specific requirements on regulated 
entities to conduct personalized security assessments, analyze the 
results, and prepare a security assessment report that is included in 
their security plans.
    A completed security assessment report must be submitted to the 
Coast Guard as part of the plan approval process and include a 
description of how the on-scene survey was conducted, key facility 
operations to protect, each vulnerability found, security measures to 
address each vulnerability, and potential gaps in security policies and 
procedures.
    In February 2020, the Coast Guard provided further guidance to the 
regulated industry on incorporating computer systems and networks into 
their required assessments and plans. During inspections to verify 
compliance, the industry sought more specific guidance on ways to 
integrate cyber into their existing security regime. The Coast Guard 
partnered with the Homeland Security Systems Engineering and 
Development Institute, a Federally-funded research and development 
center operated by the MITRE Corporation, and the National Maritime 
Security Advisory Committee (a Federal Advisory Committee) to develop 
the Maritime Cybersecurity Assessment and Annex Guide. This guide was 
released in January 2023 and provides a clear process for identifying 
and describing cybersecurity vulnerabilities, then addressing those 
vulnerabilities in mandated security plans.
    For foreign ships operating in U.S. waters, the process is very 
similar to MTSA-regulated vessels and facilities. Per the International 
Ship and Port Facility Security Code (ISPS Code), each ship must 
conduct a Ship Security Assessment that identifies key shipboard 
operations to protect; threats to key shipboard operations; existing 
security measures and procedures; and potential weaknesses, including 
human factors, in security policies and procedures. This assessment 
then leads to the development of a Ship Security Plan, which must be 
approved by the ship's Flag Administration, and is verified by the 
Coast Guard during regular compliance examinations in U.S. ports.
Regionally: Area Maritime Security Assessments and Plans
    At the regional level, Area Maritime Security Committees (AMSC) are 
required by Federal regulations and serve an essential coordinating 
function during normal operations and emergency response. They are 
comprised of Government agency and maritime industry leaders and serve 
as the primary regional body to jointly share threat information, 
evaluate risks, and coordinate risk mitigation activities. As the 
Federal Maritime Security Coordinator (FMSC), Coast Guard Captains of 
the Port (COTP) around the country direct their regional AMSC's 
activities.
    The AMSC's input is vital to the development and continuous review 
of the Area Maritime Security (AMS) Assessment and Area Maritime 
Security Plan (AMSP). The AMS Assessment must include the critical MTS 
infrastructure and operations in the port; a threat assessment that 
identifies and evaluates each potential threat; consequence and 
vulnerability assessments; and a determination of the required security 
measures for the three Maritime Security levels.
    These AMS assessments then lead to the collaborative development of 
AMSPs to ensure Government and industry security measures are 
coordinated to deter, detect, disrupt, respond to, and recover from a 
threatened or actual Transportation Security Incident (TSI).
    The COTP/FMSC and the AMSC ensure that a formal AMS Assessment for 
their entire Area of Responsibility (AOR) is conducted at least every 5 
years. The AMS Assessment must also be evaluated at least annually to 
ensure its adequacy, accuracy, and consistency.
Nationally: Interagency Coordination and Assessment
    As outlined in Presidential Policy Directive 21, along with the 
Department of Transportation, the Coast Guard is the co-Sector Risk 
Management Agency (SRMA) for the Maritime Transportation Subsector. As 
a SRMA, the Coast Guard is responsible for coordinating risk management 
efforts with the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency 
(CISA), other Federal departments and agencies, and MTS stakeholders.
    CISA is a key partner in all our risk management activities. CISA's 
technical expertise directly supports the Coast Guard's ability to 
leverage our authorities and experience as the regulator and SRMA of 
the MTS. CISA integrates a whole-of-government response, analyzes 
broader immediate and long-term impacts, and facilitates information 
sharing across transportation sectors. The relationship with CISA is 
strong and will continue to mature.
    As a member of the U.S. intelligence community, the Coast Guard 
provides unique authorities, opportunities, and capabilities to 
collect, fuse, analyze, and share information and intelligence across 
domestic and international government and non-government stakeholders 
throughout the MTS. The Coast Guard's intelligence authorities allow 
for a collective understanding of factors and entities affecting the 
maritime domain, including physical security and cybersecurity. 
Threats, such as ransomware attacks, continue to mature in 
effectiveness and prevalence, requiring the intelligence community to 
align resources and integrate efforts that protect the safety and 
security of the MTS.
    The enduring relationship with the Department of Defense (DoD) is 
also crucial to safeguarding the MTS. In many cases, DoD's ability to 
surge forces from domestic to allied seaports depends on the same 
commercial maritime infrastructure as the MTS. The relationship between 
the Coast Guard and DoD ensures the Nation's surge capability and sea 
lines of communication will be secure and available during times of 
crisis. By sharing threat intelligence, developing interoperable 
capabilities, and using DoD's expertise, the Coast Guard enables 
national security sealift capabilities and jointly supports our 
Nation's ability to project power around the globe.
    The Coast Guard serves as a partner to the Federal Emergency 
Management Agency (FEMA) in the Port Security Grant Program (PSGP) by 
providing subject-matter expertise in maritime security. FEMA is 
responsible for the administration and management of the program, which 
includes designing and operating the administrative mechanisms and 
managing the distribution and tracking of funds. The PSGP is designed 
to support AMSPs and facility security plans (FSPs) to protect critical 
port infrastructure from terrorism. All U.S. ports are eligible for 
PSGP funding. PSGP funds are intended to offset the costs for maritime 
security risk mitigation projects borne by maritime partners. To date 
(fiscal year 2002-fiscal year 2022), the PSGP distributed over $3.73 
billion to port stakeholders to make security improvements, including 
assisting facilities with capital investments for MTSA compliance.
Internationally: International Port Security Program
    Coast Guard efforts to secure the MTS also extend overseas. By 
leveraging international partnerships, and through the Coast Guard 
International Port Security (IPS) program, the Coast Guard conducts in-
country foreign port assessments and applies the International Maritime 
Organization's (IMO) International Ship and Port Facility Security 
(ISPS) Code to assess the effectiveness of security and anti-terrorism 
measures in foreign ports.
    If the Coast Guard finds that a country's ports do not have 
effective security and anti-terrorism measures, we may impose 
Conditions of Entry (COE) that define additional security measures that 
vessels arriving to the United States from those ports must implement. 
COE may result in security verifications of vessels before they enter 
U.S. ports to verify that additional security measures were taken in 
foreign ports. The IPS program also conducts capacity building 
engagements to assist countries in implementing effective anti-
terrorism measures.
                    the u.s. coast guard's approach
    To support the whole-of-Government effort, the Coast Guard applies 
a proven prevention and response framework to prevent or mitigate 
disruption to the MTS from the many risks it faces. Coast Guard 
authorities and capabilities cut across threat vectors, allowing 
operational commanders at the port level to quickly evaluate risks, 
apply resources, and lead a coordinated and effective response.
Prevention
    The Prevention Concept of Operations--Standards, Compliance, and 
Assessment--guides all prevention missions. It begins with establishing 
expectations in the MTS. Regulations and standards provide a set of 
baseline requirements and are critical to establishing effective and 
consistent governance regimes. With effective standards in place, 
compliance activities systematically verify that the governance regime 
is working. This part of the system is vital in identifying and 
correcting potential risks before they advance further and negatively 
impact the MTS. Effective assessment is paramount to continuous 
improvement. It provides process feedback and facilitates the 
identification of system failures so that corrective actions can be 
taken to improve standards and compliance activities.
    Importantly, the Coast Guard operationalizes this framework at the 
port level. Coast Guard COTPs oversee MTSA-regulated vessels and 
facilities through their mandated Vessel or Facility Security 
Assessments and Plans. These plans set baseline activities to protect 
the MTS through personnel training, drills and exercises, 
communication, vessel interfaces, security systems, access control, 
cargo handling, delivery of stores, and restricted area monitoring.
    The Coast Guard also has Port Security Specialists and MTS 
Cybersecurity Specialists in each Captain of the Port Zone. These new 
positions create a dedicated staff to build and maintain port-level 
security-related relationships, facilitate information sharing across 
industry and Government, advise Coast Guard and Unified Command 
decision makers, and plan security exercises.
Response
    Similar to the Prevention Concept of Operations, the Coast Guard 
has a proven, scalable response framework that can be tailored for all 
hazards. This is especially important as cyber incidents can quickly 
transition to producing physical impact, requiring operational 
commanders to immediately deploy assets to mitigate risks. Depending on 
the incident's size and severity, commanders will set clear response 
priorities, request specialized resources to help mitigate risk, and 
notify interagency partners to help coordinate the response. The 
Service is not approaching this alone.
    By regulation, MTSA-regulated vessels and facilities are required 
to report TSIs, breaches of security, and suspicious activity without 
delay. These reports enable operational commanders to rapidly notify 
other Government agencies, evaluate associated risks, deploy resources, 
and unify the response.
    For complex responses, the Coast Guard maintains deployable teams 
with specialized capabilities that can support operational commanders 
across a spectrum of prevention and response needs. These teams include 
specially-trained law enforcement teams that can bolster physical 
security, pollution response teams for significant oil spills or 
hazardous material releases, and cyber protection teams that can help 
local responders navigate the highly technical aspects of cyber 
incident assessment and response.
    Through both prevention and response activities in the field, and 
engagements with industry, the Coast Guard captures lessons learned, 
recommendations, and best practices that strengthen the maritime 
industry's security posture and inform future policy, law, and 
regulations.
                              future focus
    Working in close collaboration with CISA and other Government 
partners, foreign allies, and industry, the Coast Guard will continue 
to leverage strong and established relationships across the maritime 
industry--at all levels--to assess and address security 
vulnerabilities.
    The Coast Guard has secured and safeguarded the maritime 
environment for over 230 years and, during that time, has faced many 
complex challenges. We have honed our operating concepts, bolstered our 
capabilities, and strengthened our resolve. These same concepts and 
capabilities will secure and protect the Nation and maritime critical 
infrastructure from malicious activity in all domains. In addressing 
risks to ports and other components of the MTS, the Coast Guard's 
commitment is to address those risks with the same level of 
professionalism, efficiency, and effectiveness that the public has come 
to expect.
    Thank you for the opportunity to testify today and thank you for 
your continued support of the United States Coast Guard. I am pleased 
to answer your questions.

    Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Rear Admiral Arguin.
    I now recognize Executive Assistant Director Goldstein for 
5 minutes to summarize his opening statement.

  STATEMENT OF ERIC GOLDSTEIN, EXECUTIVE ASSISTANT DIRECTOR, 
    CYBERSECURITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE SECURITY AGENCY, U.S. 
                DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

    Mr. Goldstein. Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar, 
Members of the subcommittee, thank you for the privilege of 
joining today to speak about such a critical issue, securing 
our Maritime Transportation System, or MTS.
    At CISA, we work every day to understand, manage, and 
reduce risk to our Nation's critical infrastructure; and given 
the complexity of the MTS, we do so in deep partnership with 
our partners at Coast Guard and TSA and, most importantly, with 
the owners and operators of critical infrastructure across the 
country, including the operators of our Nation's ports.
    We are acutely concerned by the risk of Chinese cyber 
aggression targeting our Nation's critical infrastructure. It 
is that focus that catalyzes our priority and that drives our 
investment in this critical area.
    We're focused on reducing risk in the country in 
partnership with Coast Guard and TSA in several ways. First, we 
focus on providing actionable information that the owners and 
operators of critical infrastructure can use to reduce their 
risk in a timely way. We often joint seal cybersecurity 
publications with our partners at the Coast Guard to provide 
unity of effort, unity of communication across the Government 
so that owners and operators understand the risk and take 
action in response.
    We undertake exercises to ensure that we have tested our 
processes as a Government and a cyber community, including our 
national-scale cyber storm exercise in which Coast Guard and 
TSA are both core participants. We coordinate and convene, 
including to the maritime sector Government Coordinating 
Council, which brings together partners in Government and the 
private sector to identify shared risks, and derive shared 
solutions to reduce risks across the country.
    But we're also focused on immediate and near-term risk 
reduction. Every year CISA and our partners at the NSA produce 
a publication with the cybersecurity vulnerabilities most 
frequently exploited by Chinese cyber actors. We then scan 
thousands of organizations across critical infrastructure, 
including in the maritime sector, to identify the prevalence of 
vulnerabilities on their network; and we have over 100 regional 
personnel who every day are working with organizations to help 
them mitigate vulnerabilities.
    We're also focused on reducing risks in the supply chain, 
particularly to high-risk devices manufactured by China-based 
organizations. We are currently focused on devices on the 
Federal Communications Commission's high-risk list. We've 
identified nearly 100 organizations across critical sectors 
that we can see are running these kinds of high-risk devices, 
and our regional personnel are working with these organizations 
to get them to modernize and upgrade their equipment so they 
are no longer running devices that could pose inordinate risk 
to their critical networks.
    We also have programs like CyberSentry, which provides 
Government sensors to detect threats on some of the highest-
risk private networks and our pre-ransomware notification 
initiative where we identify ransomware intrusions that have 
occurred but where harm hasn't yet happened, where there hasn't 
yet been an encryption event, and notifying those victims to 
mitigate before damage happens.
    But we also recognize that we need to focus on strategic 
change, even as we focus on tactical risk reduction efforts, 
and so we're also focused on long-term cyber defense planning 
with partners like Coast Guard and TSA to understand the most 
significant cybersecurity risks facing our country and bringing 
together partners to plan, exercise, and execute in ways that 
reduce risk over time and also recognizing that the most 
scalable cybersecurity solution is using technology products 
that are safe and secure by design and default wherever they're 
deployed.
    So we work with major technology companies to ensure that, 
whether it is a port or a hospital or water utility, they are 
using technology that is as hardened as possible against the 
threat that we know we're facing.
    This threat is significant. We have tremendous work to do 
as a Nation, as a community, but the agencies at this table and 
across Government are working every day, diligently, to make 
sure that we are staying ahead of the threat as it evolves.
    Thank you again for the chance to appear. I look forward to 
your questions.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Goldstein follows:]

                  Prepared Statement of Eric Goldstein
                              May 10, 2023
    Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar, and Members of the 
subcommittee: Thank you for the invitation to testify today on behalf 
of the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA). CISA 
leads the national effort to understand, manage, and reduce risk to our 
critical infrastructure. This mission is grounded in partnership with 
each Sector Risk Management Agency and critical infrastructure 
operators in each sector. While each sector is uniquely critical, the 
Maritime Transportation Sub-Sector, and the Nation's ports represented 
therein, serves as a linchpin of our Nation's prosperity and security. 
For this reason, our work with the U.S. Coast Guard and the maritime 
community is uniquely essential. I appreciate this opportunity to 
discuss the cybersecurity elements of CISA's work on port security.
    From Miami to Detroit, and from the Gulf Coast to the Pacific, 
America's ports drive our economic and national security. Maritime 
transportation accounts for the single largest share of U.S. trade, 
both supplying our households and businesses with necessities and 
facilitating trade that supports American jobs. We have seen in the 
past few years how disruptions to maritime commerce, regardless of 
cause, can produce significant impacts for businesses and consumers, 
and we recognize that America's ports are equally critical in enabling 
our armed forces to effectively deploy and supply.
    At CISA, we share the subcommittee's concern regarding threats to 
ports posed by the government of the People's Republic of China (PRC), 
which could manifest in multiple forms. We continue to work urgently 
with the Coast Guard and the port community to understand and mitigate 
these threats, whether from critical equipment manufactured by Chinese 
state-owned enterprises or the prospect of damaging cyber intrusions 
targeting port infrastructure. These threats catalyze our focus, 
clarify our intent, and underpin our shared investment.
 partnership with the united states coast guard and the transportation 
                        security administration
    Our Nation's maritime system is highly complex, and no one 
organization maintains the authorities, resources, or capability to 
bear the burden of securing these systems alone. Our partnership with 
both the Coast Guard and the Transportation Security Administration 
(TSA) are foundational in achieving our shared mission. The Coast Guard 
and TSA play leading roles in operationalizing the Department of 
Homeland Security's responsibilities as a co-Sector Risk Management 
Agency for the Transportation Systems Sector. CISA coordinates with the 
Coast Guard and TSA to advance this work in several ways.
    First, we must provide members of the maritime community, including 
port operators, with actionable information to protect their systems. 
For this reason, CISA and the Coast Guard frequently engage in joint 
amplification or development of combined products for this community, 
with recent examples including CISA's amplification of a Coast Guard 
Safety Alert with recommended cybersecurity best practices for 
commercial vessels and a joint advisory regarding malware exploiting 
the Log4Shell vulnerability. In addition, the Coast Guard was a key 
partner in our development of the Cross-Sector Cybersecurity 
Performance Goals (CPGs), which provide a straightforward and 
actionable set of cybersecurity actions prioritized by cost, impact, 
and complexity and organized around the National Institute of Standards 
and Technology Cybersecurity Framework. The CPGs are a foundational 
tool to help any organization align limited cybersecurity resources 
toward the most impactful investments. We look forward to partnering 
closely with the Coast Guard to develop sector-specific goals for 
maritime stakeholders that reflect the unique technology and risk 
considerations of the sub-sector.
    Second, the Coast Guard and TSA are key participants in Cyber 
Storm, CISA's annual national capstone cyber exercise that brings 
together the public and private sectors in a simulated response to a 
cyber crisis impacting the Nation's critical infrastructure. During the 
current Cyber Storm exercise series, the Coast Guard and TSA are 
participating within working groups of Federal entities to respond to a 
simulated cyber threat. These exercises foster collaboration and 
communication across agencies to ensure that Federal and non-Federal 
entities are ready to collectively respond to major cyber incidents.
    Finally, CISA, the Coast Guard, and TSA coordinate through formal 
mechanisms to promote critical infrastructure security. All three 
agencies are members of the Maritime Modal Subsector Government 
Coordinating Council (GCC) under the Critical Infrastructure 
Partnership Advisory Council framework, which provides a forum for 
Federal agencies to collaborate with one another and to seek private-
sector input. Specifically, the Maritime Modal Subsector GCC allows 
Federal agencies to collaborate on strategies for mitigating risk to 
ports and other elements of the maritime transportation sub-sector. 
Through this coordinating council and other channels, CISA, the Coast 
Guard, and TSA stay connected with one another and with non-Federal 
entities to support collective efforts to mitigate cybersecurity and 
other risks to ports.
            supporting our partners to actively reduce risk
    CISA also works directly with ports and other critical 
infrastructure entities to support their cybersecurity efforts. By 
leveraging our expertise, our ability to generate efficiencies of 
scale, and our ability to cross-reference information from multiple 
sources to gain broad visibility into the cyber threat environment, 
CISA is uniquely positioned to assist critical infrastructure operators 
with mitigating cybersecurity risk.
    As a key part of this effort, we enable network owners and 
operators to harden their networks against known and potential tactics, 
techniques, and procedures used by PRC cyber actors. For example, we 
published in late 2022 a joint advisory with the National Security 
Agency and the Federal Bureau of Investigation outlining the 
vulnerabilities most frequently used by PRC actors, enabling 
organizations around the country to close down intrusion paths commonly 
used by the PRC to achieve their strategic goals. We regularly scan 
over 5,000 Federal, critical infrastructure, and State, local, Tribal, 
and territorial (SLTT) partners' networks upon their request to 
identify the presence of these vulnerabilities and notify identified 
entities to prioritize urgent mitigation. More recently, we have 
undertaken an effort intended to make network owners and operators 
aware of the prevalence of devices produced by PRC-based vendors that 
are listed on the Federal Communications Commission's ``Covered List,'' 
which, under the Secure and Trusted Communications Networks Act of 
2021, pose an ``unacceptable risk to the national security of the 
United States or the security and safety of United States persons.'' 
Using commercial tools, we have identified such products used on 
critical infrastructure networks across the country and have already 
notified 88 critical infrastructure organizations using such products 
about the potential associated risks. In nearly all cases, the notified 
entities have chosen to take urgent steps to replace these products 
from their networks and reduce the likelihood of unauthorized access by 
PRC actors.
    We are particularly focused on proactive efforts to reduce the 
likelihood that our partner entities will experience serious 
cybersecurity incidents. We have enrolled a select group of our 
Nation's most critical infrastructure entities in the CyberSentry 
program, a voluntary effort that uses commercial off-the-shelf tools 
and equipment to identify and detect malicious activity targeting 
critical infrastructure corporate and industrial control systems 
networks. This program has yielded significant operational benefits 
among participating entities, and we look forward to expanding into the 
maritime sub-sector in the next year. Further, our Vulnerability 
Scanning service helps organizations identify and address 
vulnerabilities, particularly those that are known to be exploited by 
adversaries. In addition, we have over 100 cybersecurity personnel 
across the country to provide guidance, assistance, and a front door to 
CISA's broader portfolio of risk reduction services. These regional 
personnel are working every day to build relationships with the 
maritime community to understand what these stakeholders need and 
ensure that CISA provides every possible resource to support their 
cybersecurity efforts.
    CISA also has an important role in helping critical infrastructure 
entities prevent the worst outcomes after a cyber intrusion has 
occurred. We leverage information from partners and security 
researchers to notify victims so that they can take action to contain 
and eradicate the threat. Our new Pre-Ransomware Notification 
Initiative identifies organizations that ransomware actors have 
compromised and aims to notify them before their data is encrypted or 
stolen, with over 160 having been notified so far. Once we receive 
information about a compromised organization, our field personnel take 
urgent action to notify the victim organization and provide specific 
mitigation guidance. CISA also provides direct support to victims of 
cyber incidents through incident response services.
    Looking to the future, CISA is continuously developing new 
capabilities to help our stakeholders drive down cyber risk based upon 
their feedback and needs. We are looking forward to several impactful 
new efforts in the coming months, including an effort that will expand 
one of our cybersecurity shared service offerings beyond the Federal 
sphere to certain critical infrastructure entities, a new attack 
surface management service, and a modernized cyber threat intelligence 
service. Through each of these efforts, we will work closely with the 
maritime community to understand their needs and maximize our ability 
to deliver services, information, and guidance that helps our partners 
detect, prevent, and effectively respond to cyber risks.
                      getting ahead of the threat
    Another pillar of CISA's cybersecurity work is our cybersecurity 
defense planning. This aligns with Congress's statutory direction for 
CISA to engage in joint planning with a range of critical 
infrastructure partners to create common, shoulder-to-shoulder 
approaches to confront malicious actors and significant cyber risks. To 
date, CISA's planning efforts have addressed topics including the 
cybersecurity implications of the Russian invasion of Ukraine and the 
creation of a framework for public-private crisis action planning. 
During 2023, CISA's planning agenda includes systemic risks posed by 
cyber intrusions against software and infrastructure that underlie 
multiple national critical functions, as well as updating the National 
Cyber Incident Response Plan. CISA will continue to engage 
transportation and maritime stakeholders in this work to ensure that it 
provides value for these key facets of our national infrastructure.
    We take a strategic approach to reduce the likelihood of damaging 
intrusions, particularly those perpetrated by PRC actors. In so doing, 
we recognize a hard truth: most technology products used across 
American networks are neither secure by design nor by default, which 
makes it far too easy for malicious actors to find vulnerabilities and 
makes it far too hard for organizations to deploy necessary security 
measures. Recently we published a set of principles with six 
international partners that intends to catalyze progress toward further 
investments and cultural shifts necessary to achieve a safe and secure 
future. These principles aim for technology providers to take ownership 
of the security outcomes of their technology products, shifting the 
burden of security from the customers and ensuring executive-level 
commitment for software manufacturers to prioritize security as a 
critical element of product development. This will be a long-term 
journey but a necessary one that will require all elements of society, 
from enterprises to technology providers to Congress, to join together 
in driving change.
                               conclusion
    Thank you again for this opportunity for CISA to testify on this 
important topic. I look forward to further discussion of how our Coast 
Guard and TSA partnership, our rapidly-maturing capabilities, and our 
planning efforts advance the national imperative to secure our ports. I 
welcome any questions you may have.

    Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Mr. Goldstein.
    I now recognize Assistant Administrator Latta for 5 minutes 
to summarize his opening statement.

  STATEMENT OF JOHN ``NEAL'' LATTA, ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR, 
   ENROLLMENT SERVICES AND VETTING PROGRAMS, TRANSPORTATION 
 SECURITY ADMINISTRATION, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

    Mr. Latta. Good afternoon, Chairman Gimenez and Ranking 
Member Thanedar and distinguished Members of the subcommittee. 
Thank you for inviting me to testify on port security, 
specifically the Transportation Security Administration's role 
in vetting maritime transportation workers for the 
Transportation Worker Identification Credential, or TWIC, 
Program.
    TSA is committed to securing the Maritime Transportation 
System, including waterways, ports, and land-side connections, 
against evolving and emerging risks. TSA partners with public 
and private-sector stakeholders, such as the U.S. Coast Guard, 
U.S. Customs and Border Protection, port owners and operators, 
and national trade and labor associations, to secure the 
Maritime Transportation System from potential security threats.
    TSA's Enrollment Services and Vetting Program Office 
administers TSA's enrollment, vetting, and credentialing 
programs. This includes end-to-end program management and 
oversight of the technology, operations, and resources that 
support TSA's security threat assessment, known as the STA.
    These programs--these vetting programs are the foundation 
for identifying potential threats to U.S. critical 
infrastructure specific to maritime security. TSA vets over 2.2 
million maritime transportation workers, such as longshoremen, 
merchant mariners, truck drivers, engineers, and individuals in 
other occupations who require a TSA--a TWIC STA for access to 
secure areas of port facilities and vessels.
    Since the TWIC program was established in 2007, TSA has 
enrolled over 7 million transportation workers. The TWIC 
program is a fee-based DHS security program mandated by the 
Maritime Transportation Security Act of 2002, or MTSA. TWIC, 
jointly administered by TSA and the U.S. Coast Guard, is one of 
several layered security measures incorporated by Federal, 
State, and local partners to prevent potential security 
breaches and incidents targeting U.S. critical and maritime 
infrastructure.
    TSA is responsible for enrolling and vetting applicants, 
adjudicating the STA, and issuing the biometric credential or 
TWIC card. The U.S. Coast Guard administers the security 
program and TWIC access control standards for the facility and 
vessel owners and operators to implement.
    Facility and vessel operators determine who is authorized 
to access secure areas of the MTSA-regulated facilities or 
vessels and verify that each individual holds a valid TWIC. 
Authorized access requires three functions to be performed: 
Verification that the individual has undergone the STA, 
verification that the individual is who they say they are, 
verification that the individual is eligible to access a 
specific area.
    TSA and its enrollment provider oversees more than 570 
enrollment centers Nation-wide, including all 50 States, the 
District of Columbia, and the U.S. territories. Following the 
collection of biometric fingerprints and facial photograph and 
biographic information, TSA performs the vetting of TWIC 
applicants for criminal history, intelligence or ties to 
terrorism, and lawful presence.
    TSA adjudicates most TWIC applicants, approximately 60 
percent of enrollments, within 24 hours, and applicants receive 
their TWIC card via the mail within 7 to 10 business days. 
Approximately 40 percent of the enrollments are considered 
complex cases due to a potential disqualifying factor.
    Processing these cases may take TSA up to 30 to 60 days to 
make a determination. While most of these cases will ultimately 
result in the applicant receiving a TWIC, some applicants will 
be notified that they have potentially disqualified. All TWIC 
applicants are afforded an opportunity to participate in the 
TSA redress process, which allows individuals to appeal TSA's 
initial decision or request a waiver.
    Customer service and engagement are critical success 
factors for TSA's TWIC program. TSA recognizes its need to be 
efficient for transportation worker population to be able to 
perform their job. TSA has acknowledged the vital role a TWIC 
holder serves in supporting the flow of commerce.
    The TWIC program is focused on enhancing its security value 
while reducing the burden of obtaining and renewing a TWIC. 
Already, TSA has implemented programs to reduce the amount of 
time applicants spend at enrollment centers, making renewing 
easier, and reduced TWIC costs for on-line applicants.
    TSA continues to work to improve the enhanced maritime 
security through its TWIC program.
    Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar, and Members of 
the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to appear 
before you today. I look forward to your questions.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Latta follows:]

               Prepared Statement of John ``Neal'' Latta
                              May 10, 2023
    Good afternoon, Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar, and 
distinguished Members of the subcommittee. Thank you for inviting me to 
testify on port security, specifically the Transportation Security 
Administration's (TSA) role in vetting maritime transportation workers 
for the Transportation Worker Identification Credential (TWIC) program. 
My testimony will highlight TSA's security responsibilities and 
achievements in the maritime environment and how TSA is working to 
enhance transportation security while bolstering customer service and 
supporting the flow of commerce.
            tsa's role in securing the maritime environment
    TSA is committed to securing the Maritime Transportation System 
(MTS), including waterways, ports, and land-side connections, against 
evolving and emerging risks, such as physical and cyber intrusions. TSA 
partners with public and private-sector stakeholders, such as U.S. 
Coast Guard (USCG), U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP), port 
owners and operators, and national trade and labor associations, to 
secure the MTS from potential security threats.
    TSA's Enrollment Services and Vetting Programs (ESVP) office 
administers TSA's enrollment, vetting, and credentialing programs, 
including the end-to-end program management and oversight of the 
technology, operations, and resources that support TSA's Security 
Threat Assessment (STA) programs. The TWIC program is an STA program 
designed to mitigate insider threats. These vetting programs are the 
foundation for identifying potential threats to U.S. critical 
infrastructure, and TSA prioritizes the vetting and adjudication of its 
worker populations to minimize impediments to the economy, industry, 
and the workforce. Specific to maritime security, TSA vets over 2.2 
million maritime transportation workers, such as longshoremen, merchant 
mariners, truck drivers, engineers, and individuals in other 
occupations who require a TWIC STA for access to secure areas of port 
facilities and vessels.
                             twic overview
    The TWIC program is a fee-based Department of Homeland Security 
(DHS) security program mandated by the Maritime Transportation Security 
Act of 2002 (MTSA), which mandates that individuals requiring 
unescorted access to MTSA-regulated facilities and vessels must be 
issued a biometric transportation security card once the individual is 
determined not to pose a risk to transportation or national security. 
TWIC, jointly administered by TSA and USCG, is one of several layered 
security measures incorporated by Federal, State, and local partners to 
prevent potential security breaches and incidents targeting U.S. 
critical and maritime infrastructure. Since the TWIC program was 
established in 2007, TSA has enrolled over 7 million transportation 
workers.
            twic and the security threat assessment process
    TSA is responsible for enrolling and vetting applicants, 
adjudicating the STA, and issuing the biometric credential. The USCG 
administers the security program and TWIC access control standards for 
facility and vessel owners and operators to implement. Facility and 
vessel operators determine who is authorized to access secure areas of 
their MTSA-regulated facilities or vessels and verify that each 
individual holds a valid TWIC. Authorized access requires three 
functions to be performed: verification that an individual has 
undergone an STA, identity management, and establishment of the 
individual's business purpose.
    TSA and its enrollment provider oversee more than 570 enrollment 
centers Nation-wide, including all 50 States, the District of Columbia, 
and U.S. territories. Following the collection of biometric (i.e., 
fingerprints and facial photograph) and biographic information, TSA 
creates a TWIC record in its case management system and performs the 
vetting of applicants for criminal history, intelligence/ties to 
terrorism, and lawful presence. Based on the vetting results, TSA 
adjudicates the case based on the interim and permanent disqualifying 
factors listed in TSA's regulations in 49 CFR Part 1572.
    TSA's case management system adjudicates most TWIC applicants--
approximately 60 percent of total enrollments--within 24 hours and an 
applicant receives their TWIC card via mail within 7 to 10 business 
days. Approximately 40 percent of enrollments are considered complex 
cases due to a potentially disqualifying factor. Processing these cases 
may take TSA up to 30 to 60 days to make a determination. While most of 
these cases will ultimately result in the applicant receiving a TWIC, 
some applicants will be notified that they have been potentially 
disqualified. All TWIC applicants are afforded an opportunity to 
participate in the TSA redress process, which allows individuals to 
appeal TSA's initial decision or request a waiver.
             twic contributions to the movement of commerce
    TSA mitigates security risks to maritime transportation by 
recurrently vetting TWIC holders to ensure individuals who pose a 
potential threat to transportation and national security cannot access 
secure areas. TSA continually strives to enhance its identity 
management and vetting capabilities. For example, in 2021, TSA began 
subscribing all new TWIC holders in Federal Bureau of Investigation Rap 
Back Services. This automation provides TSA with more accurate and 
real-time information on TWIC holder criminal activities after 
enrollment.
    To facilitate the movement commerce, TSA has partnered with supply 
chain and maritime stakeholders to alleviate potential bottlenecks 
where TWIC or other TSA vetting programs could impede such movement. 
For example, in 2021, DHS and TSA contributed to the White House Supply 
Chain Disruptions Task Force and met with representatives at the Ports 
of Los Angeles and Long Beach, California, to discuss strategies to 
support essential workers accessing port terminals. TSA took immediate 
steps to address the needs of its maritime partners, including 
expanding enrollment center operations, expediting the vetting of 
mission-critical transportation workers, and reducing the time and 
burden associated with obtaining a TWIC.
                          customer experience
    Customer service and engagement are critical success factors for 
TSA's STA programs. TSA recognizes transportation worker populations 
require efficient services from TSA to obtain and retain 
certifications, occupations, and professions. TSA is focused on 
enhancing the security value of its program while reducing the burden 
of obtaining a TWIC.
    In 2009, TSA implemented TWIC One Visit which enables eligible 
workers to receive their TWIC card at a designated address instead of 
returning to an enrollment center for pick-up and activation. Today, 91 
percent of total TWIC applicants receive their card via mail. In August 
2022, TSA implemented a new on-line renewal capability for most TWIC 
applicants who maintain or previously maintained an active TWIC STA. 
Approximately 54 percent of active TWIC cardholders enroll for a new 
TWIC after their STA expires 5 years from the date of issuance. Of 
those workers renewing a TWIC, nearly 80 percent are using TSA's on-
line renewal capability, thereby eliminating the cost and time burden 
associated with traveling to a physical enrollment center. TWIC One 
Visit and on-line renewal grant maritime workers their TWICs faster, 
allowing them to fulfill their roles in transportation security more 
expediently.
    In addition, due to the reduced costs associated with the on-line 
transaction, TWIC applicants now pay a reduced fee when renewing their 
credentials on-line: $117.25, compared to the in-person fee of $125.25. 
Since TSA issued the first TWIC in October 2007, TSA has not increased 
the enrollment fee for TWIC applicants.
                               conclusion
    TSA continues to work to improve and enhance maritime security 
through its TWIC program. Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar, 
and Members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to 
appear before you today. I look forward to your questions.

    Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Mr. Latta.
    Members will be recognized by order of seniority for their 
5 minutes of questioning.
    I now recognize myself for 5 minutes.
    Rear Admiral Arguin, over the past few years, I have 
continued to raise concerns about the wide-spread presence of 
Chinese manufactured cranes in our Nation's ports. I'm 
particularly concerned about the use of Chinese technology and 
equipment, as well as the ports' industries overreliance on 
Chinese cranes.
    On April 3, I joined several of my colleagues in sending a 
letter to DHS asking about their efforts to address the 
vulnerabilities related to these cranes. DHS has yet to 
respond.
    Can you explain what security measures the Coast Guard has 
in place to evaluate foreign manufactured equipment and 
software in use at our ports? These can include cybersecurity 
assessments, penetration testing, configuration review, or 
malware vulnerability assessments.
    Admiral Arguin. Mr. Chairman, so the Coast Guard's role in 
ensuring port security from the local level, the local sector 
commander, captain of the port, uses its maritime security 
specialist to engage those entities that have ZPMC cranes. At 
that local level, they have had conversations about potential 
vulnerabilities identified with our partnership with CISA.
    We've also engaged our cyber protection team, elements of 
our Coast Guard cyber command to perform voluntary assessments 
of those networks to understand, better understand the 
vulnerabilities associated with those systems, as well as 
systems throughout the ports.
    At the regional level, the Area Maritime Security Committee 
had--we've had conversations with each of those entities to 
ensure they understand the potential vulnerabilities and the 
likelihood of a potential disruption.
    At the national level, I've had similar conversations with 
leadership, with port authorities around the country to make 
sure, A, they're aware of the potential vulnerabilities and to 
get a better understanding of the potential impacts that those 
vulnerabilities may have.
    Mr. Gimenez. Do we have laws in place that actually hinder 
ports from not buying these cranes?
    Admiral Arguin. Mr. Chairman, I'm not aware of the 
specifics on purchasing particular equipment. I am certainly 
interested in understanding those networks and who has access 
to those networks to better understand the potential impacts on 
commerce.
    Mr. Gimenez. OK.
    Switching gears a little bit, during the week of February 
27, 2023, the Coast Guard, working with the State Department, 
scheduled facility visits for a Cuban delegation that included 
members of the Cuban border guard and the Cuban Ministry of 
Interior. This visit would have included a tour of the Coast 
Guard headquarters here in Washington, DC.
    After my colleagues and I raised concerns with this visit, 
the Coast Guard canceled the headquarters portion of the unit 
tour but continued with the rest of the scheduled activity.
    As early as January 2021, Global Magnitsky sanctions were 
placed on the Cuban Ministry of Interior for its complicity in 
serious human rights abuses in Cuba. Individuals from the same 
Cuban ministry were invited to tour our Coast Guard 
headquarters.
    According to DHS, in September--in December 2022, the 
Office of Foreign Assets Control in the Treasury Department put 
into place a new general license for the Global Magnitsky 
program that authorizes all transactions otherwise prohibited, 
provided that they are for official U.S. Government business.
    Can you confirm whether the Coast Guard received a license 
to invite members of Cuba's Ministry of Interior, a sanctioned 
entity, to tour their headquarters? Has the Coast Guard 
requested additional licenses for foreign delegation visits 
since then?
    Admiral Arguin. Mr. Chairman, I will have to get back to 
you on whether or not we received any specific licensing for 
foreign visits to other country's headquarters.
    The International Port Security Program is a vital 
opportunity for us to evaluate foreign ports, ships that call 
on those foreign ports before they get to the United States. 
That reciprocity that we've established to ensure that 
international standards are being applied uniformly and then 
evaluated so that best practices could be shared is an 
important aspect of the layered approach that the Coast Guard 
takes.
    Mr. Gimenez. Do you think that the Cuba is a friendly 
nation to the United States?
    Admiral Arguin. Mr. Chairman, the Coast Guard's 
responsibility for ensuring port security and ensuring the 
international norms that have been established under IMO 
requires us to ensure that we have reciprocity on those ports 
that have interest for the Coast Guard. If there are--if ships 
call on those ports and intend to call on U.S. ports, we want 
to better understand what that--what the--the security measures 
that are in place in those ports so that we can effectively 
evaluate security in our own ports.
    Mr. Gimenez. Thank you.
    I yield back.
    I'll recognize the Ranking Member from Michigan, Mr. 
Thanedar.
    Mr. Thanedar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    I think I want to start with the concern the Chairman 
expressed in his questions, so--regarding, you know, reciprocal 
port visits by the United States to the foreign ports, as well 
as allowing others to visit our ports.
    Rear Admiral, my question is: What is the value of 
maintaining access to foreign ports to carry out security 
assessments? What would be the consequences if we start 
refusing reciprocal visits, like some Members across the aisle 
have suggested, if we stop these visits by others and 
reciprocally if we are not allowed to visit these foreign 
ports?
    Second, can these visits happen and yet we can protect our 
sensitive information? Because nobody wants, you know, our 
sensitive information to fall in the wrong hands. At the same 
time, we need these reciprocal inspections for our own 
safeguards. How can this be done? Can this be done without--by 
still securing the sensitive information?
    Admiral Arguin. Ranking Member Thanedar, the importance of 
the International Port Security Program and its reciprocal 
visit program really does two things for us. One, it is--it 
demonstrates the Coast Guard's leadership role in 
international--establishing and reinforcing international norms 
for port security. That's required under the international port 
security protocols.
    The availability of us or our teams to be able to go into a 
foreign port, assess the security protocols that are in place, 
provides us with visibility on potential implications or 
vulnerabilities that may be on ships that would call on U.S. 
ports. So it gives us advance notification, and it gives us the 
opportunity to put additional safeguards in place for those 
vessels where we would not have that same visibility.
    It also allows us to share best practices so that those 
ships that are calling on our ports and the countries that are 
working with us to ensure that we are all raising the standard, 
we all--elevate the protective measures that are in place to 
prevent bad things from happening within our ports.
    Mr. Thanedar. So it would be irresponsible for us to stop 
this bilateral inspections of each other's ports.
    Admiral Arguin. Ranking Member, I think that it would not 
afford us an opportunity to learn from others but also then 
help others elevate their standards for security. It would have 
the potential implication of us requiring additional safeguards 
in place that may have an impact on the safe and efficient 
movement of cargos within the United States.
    Mr. Thanedar. Do you believe there is a way for you to 
safeguard our sensitive information while these visits are 
taking place?
    Admiral Arguin. Yes, sir. I think the reciprocal visit 
really is talking about best practices. It does not get into 
sensitive information. It talks about, are there best ways to 
ensure fence line, physical security, and others? Yes, sir, I 
think we can preserve sensitive information.
    Mr. Thanedar. Thank you.
    Mr. Latta, again, thank you for being here.
    Many of the workers, including many port workers, truck 
drivers in my district rely on the TWIC card for their 
livelihood, and I wanted to know what has been done, what TSA 
has been doing in safeguarding and making sure that these TWIC 
cards are processed and accessible to the workers as early as--
as soon as possible.
    Mr. Rear Admiral, my question again is that Coast Guard has 
delayed full implementation of the electronic TWIC and 
biometric readers at ports for several years, and I'm 
wondering, how are we going to implement the requirements of 
Safe Port Act of 2006?
    Mr. Latta. Thank you for that question.
    We take very seriously the adjudication processing time 
frames for the TWIC card. We have put some technology in place 
to really speed that up, and, for the most part, as I said in 
my testimony, 60 percent of individuals get their TWIC card in 
7 to 10 business days.
    We also, as of August of last year, we have implemented now 
on-line renewal. So there's no longer a need to come into an 
enrollment center to do your enrollment for your renewal of 
your card. So we're finding 80 percent of our applicants are 
going through that process.
    So we have done a lot to move there. We've also hired 
additional adjudicators and put technology there to also speed 
up that process.
    Mr. Thanedar. Thank you.
    Mr. Gimenez. The gentleman's time has expired.
    I now recognize the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr. Higgins.
    Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Mr. Latta, not to beat that subject, can my staff exchange 
contact data with your staff so that we can communicate 
directly regarding delays for trusted traveler applications and 
TWIC cards, et cetera? You answered the question very well, but 
can we--can our staff exchange data? OK, we'll do that at this 
hearing.
    Mr. Latta. Yes, sir.
    Mr. Higgins. Admiral Arguin, I have a couple of questions 
for you, sir, and I'm going to touch on something. In the 2017 
and 2018 time frame in south Louisiana, we had reports of a 
gentleman in a Coast Guard jacket duck hunting in a kayak. 
Would that have been you? Potentially, that's you, sir. We may 
have further questions for you on that topic.
    So, on security for our ports, it's really an evolving 
challenge, and we have to stay ahead of some of these threats, 
and the heightened awareness is, I believe, the beginning of--
as they say, chance favors the prepared mind.
    We were made aware of a particular threat in south 
Louisiana recently. Two men from New York city of Russian 
nationals, Russian descent, rented a car in Miami, were 
arrested in south Louisiana flying very advanced drone systems 
over a chemical plant, and that investigation was initiated by 
the St. Charles Parish Sheriff's Office.
    They had very advanced technologies with them, and they 
were arrested. The investigation revealed that that drone had 
flown extensively over two other chemical plants prior to their 
arrest, which was the third chemical plant. They--their bond 
was set that the judge thought was high. It was 100 grand. They 
posted the bond, and they're gone. February. The FBI is working 
on the case, but the point is this threat is out there.
    So Admiral--and Mr. Goldstein may have something to adhere, 
and I'm happy to yield my remaining couple minutes of time. 
It's important to answer. What is the Coast Guard doing to work 
with your colleagues at CISA and FBI at the Federal level and 
working in close relation with local law enforcement? What is 
the Coast Guard doing to secure our ports against the next 
generation of threat, including like the one I just described?
    I yield.
    Admiral Arguin. Congressman, at the local level, the sector 
commander, captain of the port, engages with local port 
partners, parish law enforcement, and their regional 
coordinating mechanism through either their FBI or other law 
enforcement entities. Clearly, any anomalous activity, whether 
it's an unmanned system or somebody that may be just not doing 
things that we think are appropriate around a critical 
infrastructure, that information needs to get to us, to law 
enforcement in a fast way so that we can investigate.
    Current capabilities within the Coast Guard to specifically 
address drones over critical infrastructure is limited by 
authority that is authorized by the Secretary to be able to 
take specific action, and that's not organic capability that is 
at the local sector level. Our maritime security forces have a 
counter-UAS capability, but that requires specific 
authorization.
    So our ability to counter----
    Mr. Higgins. Do you have--let me just interject, Admiral.
    Do you have the authority at the field level to make 
aggressive law enforcement decisions like seizing technology 
like to which I just described?
    Admiral Arguin. Congressman, we have the ability to engage 
our partners to be able to investigate when those anomalous 
activities are happening, but as far as physical capabilities 
at the organic level, at the sector, those capabilities do not 
exist.
    Mr. Higgins. I believe that should be our task, to address 
that as Congress, to make sure you have the necessary authority 
and that the laws are written to allow you to exercise that 
authority, and you have the technology required to protect our 
ports.
    My time has expired, Mr. Chairman. I yield.
    Mr. Gimenez. The gentleman yields.
    I recognize the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Payne.
    Mr. Payne. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    The Transportation Worker Identification Credential, the 
TWIC program, helps protect secure areas of the ports by 
ensuring only individuals who have undergone TSA security 
threat assessments are provided access. However, TWIC vetting 
can serve as a barrier to employment, as individuals must visit 
an enrollment center to apply in person and then wait for TSA 
to conduct the vetting and ship a card back to them.
    Applicants with a criminal history face additional delays, 
as TSA must manually adjudicate their eligibility. With more 
than 2 million individuals holding active TWIC cards, a 
significant portion of the U.S. work force is reliant on the 
TWIC program for their livelihoods.
    So I'm a strong believer in making sure that we provide 
avenues for formerly incarcerated individuals to re-enter the 
work force or else they'll go back to whatever sent them away 
in the first place.
    What does TSA do to minimize waiting times and reduce 
barriers for individuals with a criminal record who have served 
their time and are now--and are not disqualified by statute 
from holding a TWIC card?
    Mr. Latta. Thank you for that question.
    This is an area that we do take a big focus on. We actually 
work with probation and parole boards to work with them on the 
redress process that was required underneath MTSA. This allows 
individuals to file waivers that we work through on that. The 
vast majority of people that file the waivers will receive the 
waiver.
    It is a process they have to go through, and we help them 
through this often through second-chance events through 
probation, parole boards, and work very closely with them, too. 
So we have had great success on that in getting people back 
into the work force.
    Mr. Payne. Well, that's good to hear because, you know, 
whenever the issue was, that they made a mistake, and if it's 
not a disqualifying matter, then, you know, we have to do 
everything we can to reincorporate individuals into society or 
else, you know, God forbid, they'll return to, you know, bad 
habits.
    So that's the major problem with folks out here. They come 
out; they're ready, but then, you know, there's no 
availability. Nobody wants to hire them. They said: You've done 
your time and you served your--and then--you know, you've done 
your time, you've served your purpose, but we're not going to 
hire you.
    So and I appreciate that.
    Rear Admiral, cyber threats continue to evolve and pose 
significant risks to critical infrastructure, including ports 
and maritime transportation systems. We have seen how 
destructive cyber attacks can be, as any attack that disrupts 
port operations can have a catastrophic, a cascading effect 
across U.S. economy.
    Rear Admiral and Mr. Goldstein, do you believe that the 
Federal Government is providing port owners and operators with 
the resources and guidance and access to technical expertise 
they need to enhance their cyber defenses to the extent 
necessary to counter evolving threats?
    Mr. Goldstein. Thank you, sir. It's a really important 
question.
    From the point of view at CISA, we partner closely with 
Coast Guard both to make sure that we are staying on top of the 
cyber threat environment as it evolves and to urgently provide 
port owners and operators the timely information that they need 
to update their defenses. That could be in the form of 
published advisories that we often seal jointly between CISA 
and the Coast Guard to show that unity of message, or it could 
be technical information that we can share via more automated 
means.
    We also work closely with the Coast Guard's protection 
teams to make sure that they can benefit from the breadth of 
cross-sector information that CISA brings to bear. So, of 
course, given the pace of the evolving threat environment, we 
always have to keep moving faster than the adversary, but we 
are working urgently to make sure the port owners and operators 
have the information that they need to safeguard their systems 
against threats as they evolve.
    Mr. Payne. Rear Admiral.
    Admiral Arguin. Congressman, just to focus on the resources 
aspect of that, Coast Guard is heavily involved with FEMA's 
Port Security Grant Program, and over the years, that grant 
program has provided funding and support for a variety of 
different protocols and items that can enhance security. Of 
late, there has been an emphasis on funding and supporting 
cyber protective grants.
    Mr. Gimenez. The gentleman's time has expired.
    I now recognize the gentleman from New York, Mr. LaLota.
    Mr. LaLota. Thank you, Chairman.
    Gentlemen, thanks for being here with us. Like a few of my 
colleagues, I want to focus most of my time on cybersecurity.
    I represent New York's First Congressional District, the 
east end of Long Island in Suffolk County, and Suffolk County 
is home to about 1.5 million people, and our county government 
has a budget of about $4 billion.
    Last year, the Suffolk County government fell victim to a 
massive cyber attack and the impacts were devastating. Over a 
half a million people's information was compromised. Hackers 
gained access to 470,000 driver's licenses, 26,000 social 
security numbers, and 71 county systems. This attack time-
warped the entire county back into the 1990's, using pen and 
paper to take down 9-1-1 calls, taking away our access to 
geolocation devices, and forcing law enforcement officers to 
rely on finicky radios to respond to emergency needs.
    While investigators into the cyber attack are still on-
going, it's clear there was a major cybersecurity failure and 
that we collectively must do more as State, local, and Federal 
Governments to do more for our folks.
    Just about 50 miles away from my district is the Port of 
New York and New Jersey, the largest container port on the East 
Coast. In 2022 alone, the Port of New York and New Jersey moved 
approximately $271 billion worth of goods. As a security 
officer of the Port of New York and New Jersey Greg Ehrie said, 
this port is the gateway to one of the most concentrated 
consumer markets in North America and most recently achieved 
status as the busiest port in the United States.
    We can only imagine what would happen if there was a cyber 
attack on that port and what--to the like of what Suffolk 
County endured. The impacts, I'm afraid, could be catastrophic, 
which leads me to my first question to the admiral, sir. Can 
you discuss with the committee the role of the Coast Guard's 
cyber protection teams in helping ports mitigate cyber 
vulnerability, sir?
    Admiral Arguin. Congressman, the Coast Guard's cyber 
protection teams are a team of 39 individuals that are highly-
trained technical specialists that are able to evaluate, assess 
networks, to look for anomalies on those networks, and then 
provide feedback to those network owners on ways that they can 
shore up potential vulnerabilities.
    They are directly connected with CISA's teams as well so 
that we all share information to identify emerging threats and 
vulnerabilities and to be able to provide advice back to those 
entities to find ways to close those vulnerabilities.
    If there is an attack, then that team can also come in and 
provide cyber forensics support in support of CISA, as well as 
Federal law enforcement to not only restore network capability 
or give the all-clear that that network can resume normal 
operation when it's safe to do so, but that unique skill set is 
able to be provided to those port stakeholders from an 
assessment perspective but then also from a response 
perspective to resume normal operations as soon as possible.
    Mr. LaLota. Admiral, given that we all probably agree that 
the threat is growing and its impact could be devastating, do 
you feel like we're on the right trajectory with respect to 
where our leadership is going and where our resources are being 
allotted in this field?
    Admiral Arguin. Congressman, I can certainly speak to the 
commandant's perspective on the growing challenges that cyber 
poses across the entirety of the marine transportation system 
and our investments in expanding. We've got a third cyber 
protection team is being established on the West Coast, and 
that demand signal continues to grow to provide the right skill 
sets to support the Nation's ports.
    Mr. LaLota. Thanks, Admiral.
    Mr. Goldstein, following the Colonial Pipeline ransomware 
attack in 2021, TSA issued several cybersecurity regulations 
requiring pipeline owners and operators to improve their 
cybersecurity practices. They've also extended the 
cybersecurity regulations to the rail and aviation sectors.
    My question is, sir: Looking at the devastating impact of 
the Colonial ransomware attack, has CISA or Coast Guard 
considered additional cybersecurity regulations for our 
maritime ports? If so, how are you working with affected 
stakeholders to develop these regulations?
    Mr. Goldstein. I'll defer to my colleagues at Coast Guard 
and TSA on any plans they may have for future or current 
regulations.
    I will say, at CISA, our goal is to really establish that 
baseline of technical measures that are most effective against 
the threats that we are seeing. Last fall, and then refreshed 
this spring, we released our cybersecurity performance goals, 
as directed via a Presidential national security memorandum, 
and these performance goals are really that succinct set of the 
most effective security practices prioritized by complexity, 
cost, and impact that all entities can use on a voluntary basis 
to know where to invest next and our partners with compulsory 
authorities can look to as a common resource across sectors.
    Mr. LaLota. Thank you.
    My time has expired. I yield, Mr. Chairman.
    Mr. Gimenez. The gentleman's time has expired.
    I recognize the gentleman from California, Mr. Garcia.
    Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    I want to thank all of our witnesses. Thank you for your 
service.
    I'm proud to represent Long Beach and the Port of Long 
Beach, and Port of Long Beach and LA, of course, are the 
largest port complex in the United States as it relates to 
cargo container volume. I was mayor there for 8 years. The port 
there is a department of the city, and so I'm very involved in, 
obviously, port security and many of the issues that are being 
discussed today.
    I'm also proud to co-chair the Congressional Ports Caucus 
and understand how critical port infrastructure is to the 
Nation's economy.
    I want to talk about the security piece just a little bit 
as well. I know that ports being not just an economic driver 
but also critical in security and critical in something that 
we're all interested in, I wanted to mention some of the--you 
know, some of the comments that were being made today, which I 
think a little bit, some of them, are a little off the mark.
    I'm not sure if anyone here knows how many automated ports 
there are in the United States. Anyone have an idea?
    There's actually only 4 ports, terminals that are actually 
automated of the 360 terminals that we have in the United 
States, and I mention that because there have been comments 
also in reports and in the media about access and the ability 
for maybe foreign actors to interfere with some of these 
automated cranes and automated terminals.
    Why don't I just give you an example. For example, in my 
district, of course, thanks to the ILWU and so many other 
workers, every single crane can be operated manually. We have 
one automated terminal there that can also be switched in an 
emergency to completely be operated manually.
    There have been folks that have, in the Majority, that have 
claimed, and I'll quote: ``If an adversary exploits the 
operational technology system of these cranes, our port 
operations could be completely shut down.''
    You know, not just me but the American Association of Ports 
called that alarmist and sensationalized. While we should take 
port security as a critical issue we should discuss and 
seriously, it's important to remember that there is no foreign 
power that can somehow infiltrate our terminals and shut down 
our ports as it relates to automated cranes.
    Mr. Goldstein, now, we do know that hackers have actually 
shut down terminals in a different way before. Is that correct?
    Mr. Goldstein. I'm sorry, sir. Would you repeat the----
    Mr. Garcia. We know that hackers have shut down ports 
before in different ways but not through cranes. Is that 
correct?
    Mr. Goldstein. Sir, I don't have off the top of my head a 
specific example where a hacker has shut down a port terminal.
    Mr. Garcia. I'll mention that we had in San Diego, 
actually, a cyber attack that took down a cargo carrier. It was 
a Maersk cargo container, a carrier. The computer network got 
shut down. It caused great damage. So these are the issues 
around cybersecurity that are really critical, I think, as it 
relates to ports.
    But we also should talk about, when we have these 
discussions, more system-wide vulnerabilities. Do you think the 
Port Security Grant Program, which funds cybersecurity 
organizations, is an important tool to make sure that our ports 
are actually safe from espionage or hacking?
    Mr. Goldstein. Yes, sir. Absolutely.
    Mr. Garcia. Well, thank you.
    I also agree that the Port Security Grant Program is 
critical for ports across the country, and I mention that 
because every single Republican Member of this committee 
actually voted to slash that program, along with other grant 
programs as well.
    Now, I take competition with China and port security also 
very seriously, but this discussion is not exactly directed at 
that.
    I want to thank you all for your commitment to investing in 
the country, investing in overall broad port security, and your 
support for the Port Security Grant Program.
    I yield back.
    Ms. Lee [presiding]. Thank you, Mr. Garcia.
    At this time, I believe I will recognize myself for the 
purpose of 5 minutes of questioning.
    I am proud to represent a portion of the city of Tampa, and 
ensuring proper security at the Port of Tampa is a key priority 
for Florida and for our Nation. Our port helps move 33 million 
tons of cargo per year and is responsible for $17 billion of 
economic impact.
    When it has--it is a major cruise home port and also a 
shipyard repair center. When it isn't operating, as is the case 
during occasional natural disasters, the entire region 
experiences shortage of fuel, food, and other essentials.
    I'd like to focus my questions on you, Assistant Director 
Goldstein, to start out. One thing that you mentioned during 
your opening statement was the Maritime Sector Government 
Coordinating Council. Would you please elaborate on the GCC, 
the purpose of it and what it does?
    Mr. Goldstein. Yes, ma'am. Absolutely.
    One of the most valuable authorities that Congress has 
vested in CISA is the Critical Infrastructure Partnership 
Advisory Council Authority called CIPAC. That allows us to 
bring together partners from the private sector with relevant 
Government agencies in a trusted forum where they can be candid 
and transparent about the risks that they are seeing and work 
with partners both in industry and Government to identify 
shared and common solutions.
    So we do this work with multiple sectors. In this case, 
with our partners at Coast Guard, we bring together partners in 
the maritime sector to have just these candid conversations 
about the risks that our partners are seeing so that we can 
develop shared solutions together on an on-going, sustained 
basis.
    Ms. Lee. You mentioned in your testimony that one of the 
things you were working on in the GCC was developing sector-
specific goals in the maritime sector. What is your time line 
and your process for actually developing those sector-specific 
goals that we can then be using as a metric for measuring our 
success?
    Mr. Goldstein. Yes, ma'am.
    Our goal with developing sector-specific cybersecurity 
performance goals is to really, in the first instance, be led 
by our industry partners and the sector risk management agency; 
in this case, our partners at Coast Guard. So we are working 
now with Coast Guard and maritime stakeholders to understand 
the gaps that sector-specific goals could help fill that would 
be additive to the cross-sector goals that we've already 
developed.
    But the real key point here is, because these goals are 
voluntary, they need to add value, and so we want to make sure 
that our maritime sector stakeholders, as with stakeholders 
across critical sectors, see voluntary value in these goals. 
We're ideally going to be led by their efforts instead of 
imposing an artificial time line that may yield an end result 
that actually isn't useful to help our partners reduce their 
risks.
    Ms. Lee. Tell us, if you would, more about the cyber storm 
training exercise and the private-public partnership that is 
part of that exercise.
    Mr. Goldstein. Yes, ma'am. Absolutely.
    One of the most important things that we can do as a 
national, indeed, even global security community is come 
together to test our processes, test our activities against 
real-world scenarios and make sure that they are actually fit 
for purpose. So the cyber storm exercise is conducted 
recurrently with different scenarios each time, bringing 
together not just partners in government but also partners in 
the private sector, particularly partners like the Information 
Sharing and Analysis Centers, or ISACs, that cover, of course, 
countless organizations across sectors to make sure that, when 
an incident does happen, we know how we're going to share 
information, what we're going to share, and, most importantly, 
that we have these processes and relationships well-established 
and codified so we're not doing this work for the first time 
when an incident occurs.
    Ms. Lee. What is CISA's role in the ISACs?
    Mr. Goldstein. So CISA's role in the ISACs is largely to be 
a cross-sector provider of timely and actionable information. 
So, for example, through our Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative, 
we continuously derive actionable information from industry 
partners, from the intelligence community, from international 
cyber defense agencies, and from our own sensors deployed 
across Government networks. We then bring that information in. 
We enrich it with insights from Government and from industry 
partners with unique visibility, and then we share it out 
broadly.
    The ISACs provide that mechanism so that a piece of 
information can be shared not just with a few entities but with 
thousands instantaneously. They provide that mechanism to 
provide both those cross-sector insights but also go deep into 
a sector when the information so dictates.
    Ms. Lee. How are you utilizing the partnership and the 
information you receive from your private-sector partners to 
help build those sector-specific goals and strengthen the 
infrastructure overall?
    Mr. Goldstein. Yes. That's a good question, ma'am.
    One of the biggest challenges in cybersecurity today is to 
understand the unique vulnerabilities that are facing 
particular sectors and the unique ways that adversaries are 
targeting each particular sector. So information from our 
partners in industry that is specific to incidents, intrusions, 
campaigns targeting a different sector will help us make 
recommendations to the specific controls or risk-reduction 
measures that can help the sector maximize its security which 
we can then codify in the performance goals.
    Ms. Lee. All right. Thank you, sir.
    I do believe that my time has now expired.
    I now recognize the Ranking Member.
    Mr. Thanedar. Madam Chairlady, thank you so much. I love 
Tampa. I love your home town.
    Thank you all for being here and thank you for your 
testimony.
    I want to go back. I know the Rear Admiral didn't get a 
chance to answer my last question. I want to go back to the 
TWIC card. Mr. Latta said, what, about 60 percent of them get 
their cards in, what, 6 to 10 days?
    Mr. Latta. Seven to 10 days.
    Mr. Thanedar. Seven to 10 days. But we can do better 
because people rely on these cards for their livelihood, the 
truck drivers, the port workers.
    So my question really is, how can we expedite these 
processes in terms of implementation of the requirements of the 
Safe Port Act of 2006? I know the Coast Guard has delayed 
implementation of the electronic TWIC and biometric readers. 
How can we use technology to speed up this process so people 
can have these cards faster and be able to work?
    Admiral Arguin. Ranking Member, so the TWIC reader rule 
implementation, we're currently evaluating the Rand 
Corporation's study on where we should have those TWIC readers 
to better inform and manage the risks that are associated with 
the facility and vessel security. So once--we've also pushed 
that report to our National Maritime Security Advisory 
Committee, Federal advisory committee, that will help inform 
ideas and recommendations on where we should take a reasonable 
approach to evaluating risks within the port to make sure that 
access control, whether it's secured or restricted access, is 
appropriate for the risks that are out there within our ports.
    Mr. Thanedar. OK. Thank you.
    Mr. Latta, as TSA contracts with additional providers for 
PreCheck enrollments, how will you assess the continued health 
of the Universal Enrollment Service Program, which covers 
PreCheck, TWIC, and Hazmat enrollments, to ensure the continued 
ability of my constituents and workers across the country to 
apply for and receive their TWIC cards?
    Mr. Latta. Yes. Thank you for that question.
    So we are Congressionally-mandated to do expansion on TSA 
PreCheck for enrollment providers. We're in the process of 
bringing two additional providers on. We do think that--we do 
not think that that will have an effect on the UES provider. 
There's still 570 enrollment centers that are open, many are in 
every State, in every territory, and around critical 
infrastructure locations that need those.
    So we do think that that will still remain, and there's a 
contractual obligation on that too to have those sites up and 
running during that time.
    Mr. Thanedar. Thank you, Mr. Latta.
    Madam Chair, I yield back.
    Ms. Lee. The gentleman yields back.
    I now recognize the gentleman from Louisiana for an 
additional question.
    Mr. Higgins. Thank you for the time for an additional 
question, Madam Chair.
    Mr. Goldstein, to clarify for America, CISA has authority 
over--regarding cybersecurity in our ports. Correct?
    Mr. Goldstein. Sir, CISA has broad authority----
    Mr. Higgins. OK.
    Mr. Goldstein [continuing]. To provide cybersecurity 
assistance to cross-sectors, yes.
    Mr. Higgins. That's where I'm going.
    So the Port of Lake Charles, for instance, in my district 
is a hub of energy export sector of the entire country, 
including LNG and petrochemical products. The coordinated 
effort between many private entities sort-of intersect there in 
the port environment. You could have scores of business 
entities that are involved in that operation that intersect 
right there, pipelines, utilities, transport, the port itself, 
chemicals. There's many, many layers of operators there. Any 
one of them could have some random employee that works in their 
IT department detect a threat in the dead of night. They don't 
stop working. They work 24/7, 365.
    So are you accessible? What is the communications system at 
2 o'clock in the morning on a holiday weekend, a Saturday 
night? If I'm an IT worker at a pipeline and I detect a cyber 
threat----
    Mr. Goldstein. Yes.
    Mr. Higgins [continuing]. How do I reach you?
    Mr. Goldstein. Yes, sir, absolutely. Let me give two 
answers.
    The first to your question, sir, is we have a 24 by 7 watch 
floor. It is called CISA Central. It is manned around the 
clock, and so organizations across the country can report a 
cyber incident and get a response at any time.
    I will also add, sir, we have regional cybersecurity 
experts, including in and around your district, whose role it 
is to build these deep relationships with operators of critical 
infrastructure of cross-sectors so that not only can we help to 
build resilience before an incident occurs, but when something 
happens, they have somebody in the area who they know and 
trust.
    Mr. Higgins. Is that by telephone or by email?
    Mr. Goldstein. So, sir, for CISA Central, it can be reached 
by phone, by email, or by an on-line report.
    Mr. Higgins. So, if I'm an IT employee at a pipeline and I 
feel strongly enough about a threat, I'd be able to talk to a 
human being at CISA on a telephone in the dead of night on a 
weekend----
    Mr. Goldstein. Yes, sir.
    Mr. Higgins [continuing]. To help walk me through what the 
next step is on responding to this threat?
    Mr. Goldstein. Yes, sir.
    Mr. Higgins. That's reassuring.
    Thank you for that answer.
    Madam Chair, I appreciate the additional time, and I yield.
    Ms. Lee. The gentleman yields back.
    I thank the witnesses for their valuable testimony and the 
Members for their questions.
    The Members of the subcommittee may have some additional 
questions for the witnesses, and we would ask the witnesses to 
respond to these in writing. Pursuant to committee rule VII(D), 
the hearing record will be held open for 10 days.
    Without objection, the subcommittee stands adjourned.
    [Whereupon, at 3:08 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]



                            A P P E N D I X

                              ----------                              

    Questions From Honorable Robert Garcia for Wayne R. Arguin, Jr.
    Question 1. How have USCG and CISA provided direction to public and 
private-sector organizations who aim to leverage USCG's Maritime 
Cybersecurity Assessment and Annex Guide and CISA's Marine 
Transportation System Resilience Assessment Guide?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 2. I would like to address how USCG, CISA, and TSA are 
aligning together to address port security risks, especially cyber 
risks.
    In January 2023, USCG released the Maritime Cybersecurity 
Assessment and Annex Guide, while in March CISA released the Marine 
Transportation System Resilience Assessment Guide in collaboration with 
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE).
    Based on feedback I received from stakeholders, CISA and USCG 
personnel who coordinate with the maritime sector were unaware of their 
counterpart agency's strategy.
    To what extent did USCG and CISA collaborate with each other in 
developing these Guides?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 3. With the release of the administration's National 
Cybersecurity Strategy in March, what efforts have been made or are 
planned to ensure that USCG, CISA, and TSA are working together to 
synchronize their efforts to safeguard our Nation's ports?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 4a. Ports serve as the intermodal hubs for maritime, rail, 
pipelines, and highways to connect supply chains.
    What alignment is happening between USCG, CISA, and TSA to provide 
critical infrastructure stakeholders with timely threat information and 
create a single mechanism for incident reporting to Federal agencies?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 4b. How are your agencies scaling public-private 
collaboration with Information Sharing and Analysis Centers (ISACs)?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 4c. Are there cybersecurity regulations being developed as 
outlined in the National Cybersecurity Strategy to address risks 
associated with ports? If so, are those regulations being developed in 
collaboration with critical infrastructure owners and operators?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
      Questions From Chairman Carlos A. Gimenez for Eric Goldstein
    Question 1. How have USCG and CISA provided direction to public and 
private-sector organizations who aim to leverage USCG's Maritime 
Cybersecurity Assessment and Annex Guide and CISA's Marine 
Transportation System Resilience Assessment Guide?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 2. I would like to address how USCG, CISA, and TSA are 
aligning together to address port security risks, especially cyber 
risks. In January 2023, USCG released the Maritime Cybersecurity 
Assessment and Annex Guide, while in March CISA released the Marine 
Transportation System Resilience Assessment Guide in collaboration with 
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE). Based on feedback I received 
from stakeholders, CISA and USCG personnel who coordinate with the 
maritime sector were unaware of their counterpart agency's strategy.
    To what extent did USCG and CISA collaborate with each other in 
developing these Guides?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 3. With the release of the administration's National 
Cybersecurity Strategy in March, what efforts have been made or are 
planned to ensure that USCG, CISA, and TSA are working together to 
synchronize their efforts to safeguard our Nation's ports?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 4a. Ports serve as the intermodal hubs for maritime, rail, 
pipelines, and highways to connect supply chains.
    What alignment is happening between USCG, CISA, and TSA to provide 
critical infrastructure stakeholders with timely threat information and 
create a single mechanism for incident reporting to Federal agencies?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 4b. How are your agencies scaling public-private 
collaboration with Information Sharing and Analysis Centers (ISACs)?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
    Question 4c. Are there cybersecurity regulations being developed as 
outlined in the National Cybersecurity Strategy to address risks 
associated with ports? If so, are those regulations being developed in 
collaboration with critical infrastructure owners and operators?
    Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.

                               [all]

