
 - FITARA 15.0

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]


                              FITARA 15.0

=======================================================================

                                HEARING

                               BEFORE THE

                 SUBCOMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS

                                 OF THE

                   COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM

                        HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

                    ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

                             SECOND SESSION
                               __________

                           DECEMBER 15, 2022
                               __________

                           Serial No. 117-113
                               __________

      Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Reform
      
      
                  [GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]      


                       Available at: govinfo.gov,
                         oversight.house.gov or
                             docs.house.gov
                             
                               __________

                    U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
                    
50-157 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2023                              
                             

                   COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM

                CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York, Chairwoman

Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of   James Comer, Kentucky, Ranking 
    Columbia                             Minority Member
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts      Jim Jordan, Ohio
Jim Cooper, Tennessee                Virginia Foxx, North Carolina
Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia         Jody B. Hice, Georgia
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois        Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Jamie Raskin, Maryland               Michael Cloud, Texas
Ro Khanna, California                Bob Gibbs, Ohio
Kweisi Mfume, Maryland               Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York   Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Rashida Tlaib, Michigan              Pete Sessions, Texas
Katie Porter, California             Fred Keller, Pennsylvania
Cori Bush, Missouri                  Andy Biggs, Arizona
Shontel M. Brown, Ohio               Andrew Clyde, Georgia
Danny K. Davis, Illinois             Nancy Mace, South Carolina
Debbie Wasserman Schultz, Florida    Scott Franklin, Florida
Peter Welch, Vermont                 Jake LaTurner, Kansas
Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, Jr.,      Pat Fallon, Texas
    Georgia                          Yvette Herrell, New Mexico
John P. Sarbanes, Maryland           Byron Donalds, Florida
Jackie Speier, California            Mike Flood, Nebraska
Robin L. Kelly, Illinois
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
Mark DeSaulnier, California
Jimmy Gomez, California
Ayanna Pressley, Massachusetts
                                 ------                                

                 Subcommittee on Government Operations

                 Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia, Chairman
Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of   Jody B. Hice, Georgia Ranking 
    Columbia                             Minority Member
Danny K. Davis, Illinois             Fred Keller, Pennsylvania
John P. Sarbanes, Maryland           Andrew Clyde, Georgia
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan         Andy Biggs, Arizona
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachsetts       Nancy Mace, South Carolina
Jamie Raskin, Maryland               Jake LaTurner, Kansas
Ro Khanna, California                Yvette Herrell, New Mexico
Katie Porter, California
Shontel M. Brown, Ohio

                      Russ Anello, Staff Director

    Wendy Ginsberg, Government Operations SubcommitteeStaff Director

                          Aidan Miller, Clerk

                      Contact Number: 202-225-5051

                  Mark Marin, Minority Staff Director
                                 ------                                


                         C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

                              ----------                              
                                                                   Page

Hearing held on December 15, 2022................................     1

                               Witnesses

Jason Gray, Chief Information Officer, United States Agency for 
  International Development
Oral Statement...................................................     3

Chris DeRusha, Federal Chief Information Security Officer, Office 
  of Management and Budget
Oral Statement...................................................     3

Carol C. Harris, Director, Information Technology and 
  Cybersecurity, Government Accountability Office
Oral Statement...................................................     4

(Joining Ms. Harris) Jennifer Franks, Director, Information 
  Technology and Cybersecurity, Government Accountability Office
Oral Statement...................................................

Written opening statements and statements for the witnesses are 
  available on the U.S. House of Representatives Document 
  Repository at: docs.house.gov.

                           Index of Documents

                              ----------                              

  * Questions for the Record: to Mr. DeRusha, Federal Chief 
  Information Security Officer, Office of Management and Budget; 
  submitted by Chairman Connolly.
  * Questions for the Record: to Mr. Gray, Chief Information 
  Officer, United States Agency for International Development; 
  submitted by Chairman Connolly.
  * Questions for the Record: to Ms. Harris, Director, 
  Information Technology and Cybersecurity, Government 
  Accountability Office; submitted by Chairman Connolly.

These documents are available on the U.S. House of 
  Representatives Document Repository at: docs.house.gov.

 
                              FITARA 15.0

                              ----------                              


                      Thursday, December 15, 2022

                   House of Representatives
                  Committee on Oversight and Reform
                      Subcommittee on Government Operations
                                                   Washington, D.C.

    The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 11:01 a.m., in 
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Gerald E. 
Connolly (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
    Present: Representatives Connolly, Norton, Brown, Hice, and 
Clyde.
    Mr. Connolly. The committee will come to order.
    Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a 
recess of the committee at any time.
    I want to welcome everyone to the hearing which seeks to 
continue our oversight efforts of agency implementation and 
compliance with FITARA and other information technology laws.
    Let me just say, I think this is our 16th--15th oversight 
hearing on a--on one law. I don't believe there is any 
precedent in Congress for that. I think we're unique, and it 
shows bipartisan commitment to making sure that FITARA is 
implemented and that IT modernization is the priority we 
recognized when we passed that bill into law. I credit GAO 
particularly for highlighting this issue as one of its high-
risk categories, which Congress actually listened to and 
responded to and wrote a law to try to address it. 
Implementation, however, is key. Passing a law is only part of 
the process. Making sure that law is implemented is also really 
important.
    We made changes to the scorecard. We created a scorecard to 
try to monitor and get metrics for that implementation. We have 
modified that scorecard, over the years, on a bipartisan basis. 
We've added more emphasis on cyber. We've also added more 
emphasis on personnel management issues like reporting in the 
org chart, who do you report to if you're the CIO. You know, we 
want to make sure that that person is imbued with the authority 
required.
    Because of the interest of time, I'm not going to give any 
more of an opening statement than that. I will enter my opening 
statement into the record.
    Mr. Connolly. We are going to have votes starting at 11:30. 
Unfortunately, there are going to be four votes. If there was 
one, that would be easy. Four, that's not easy.
    Eleanor Holmes Norton, when votes are called, would you be 
available to take the gavel?
    Ms. Norton. I certainly will.
    Mr. Connolly. You're wonderful, as always. Thank you so 
much.
    I now call on the distinguished ranking member, my friend, 
Jody Hice, from Georgia. This is his last hearing as a Member 
of Congress. He's been a partner, and he's been sometimes a 
foil, but we've always--we've always been civil, and we have 
really tried to make as much music as we could together, and 
certainly in the realm of IT that we're talking about today, 
that has been the case.
    So I thank Jody for his service to the American people, the 
people of Georgia, and call on him now for any opening 
statement he wishes to make.
    Mr. Hice. Thank you very much, Chairman Connolly.
    If I could take a moment of personal privilege to respond 
to that. Likewise, it's been an incredible honor to serve in 
Congress for eight years and represent the great state of 
Georgia and the 10th District. To work with you, it's been a 
great honor, and I really appreciate working underneath the 
umbrella, specifically of Gov Ops here, and your desire really 
to make government work better for the American people, and all 
the efforts to find common ground. It has been an honor, and I 
wish you the absolute best, and your family, and a wonderful 
Merry Christmas as well. So I thank you for the opportunity.
    Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Hice, and right back at you.
    Mr. Hice. OK. Thank you.
    Mr. Connolly. Thank you so much.
    Mr. Hice. Yes, I'll just say, here we are again, 15th 
iteration of FITARA. We've got to have teeth to this thing. 
We've got to have some answers. Again, the administration, why 
they refuse to submit information as required by law is getting 
extremely frustrating, and I know you share that as well.
    But I'll, likewise, forego my opening statement. I 
appreciate the witnesses being here.
    Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Hice.
    Our first witness for today is the chief--oh, well--all 
right. I'll introduce and then we'll swear you in.
    Our first witness is chief information officer for the 
Agency for International Development, Jason Gray. Welcome.
    Our second witness is the Federal chief information 
security officer in the Office of Management and Budget, Chris 
DeRusha. Welcome.
    Our final witness--actually, not our final witness. We have 
Carol Harris, director of information technology and 
cybersecurity at the Government Accountability Office. And she 
is joined by Jennifer Franks, also director of information 
technology and cybersecurity, to provide her thoughts on zero 
trust implementation. Our kind of implementation, zero trust.
    Mr. Hice. And Ms. Franks is from Georgia.
    Mr. Connolly. Oh, Lord.
    Mr. Hice. As she shares the Georgia nation, Go Dawgs.
    Mr. Connolly. All right. Well, that commends you too.
    If our witnesses would rise and raise their right hand to 
be sworn in.
    As you know, it's the custom of our committee and 
subcommittees to swear in our witnesses.
    Do you swear or affirm that the testimony you're about to 
give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, 
so help you God?
    Thank you. You may be seated.
    Let the record show that the witnesses all answered in the 
affirmative.
    Without objection, your full written statements will be 
entered into the record. We ask you now for your five-minute 
summary, keeping in mind that when they call votes--yes. We can 
accept all the written statements. Oh, if you want--well, they 
may want to just say something briefly, and then we'll go to 
questions.
    So if you can do what Mr. Hice and I just did, we'd 
appreciate that. Because we're just worried about time and we 
will want to get to substance just as quickly as we can.
    Mr. Gray, anything you want to share with us briefly for 
the record?

  STATEMENT OF JASON GRAY, CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER, UNITED 
                STATES AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL

    Mr. Gray. Thank you for the invitation to testify to you 
today. I will keep my comments brief. I do have prepared oral 
remarks, but because of the circumstances, I will keep them 
brief.
    Mr. Connolly. That will be entered into the record without 
objection.
    Mr. Gray. Thank you, Congressman. That is it.
    Mr. Connolly. Everything's fine at AID.
    Mr. Gray. Well, sorry, I have a five-minute written 
response----
    Mr. Connolly. All right. We'll come back to you.
    Mr. DeRusha.

STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER J. DERUSHA, FEDERAL CHIEF INFORMATION 
       SECURITY OFFICER, OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET

    Mr. DeRusha. Chairman Connolly, Ranking Member Hice, and 
members of the subcommittee, thank you for holding this 
important hearing on FITARA.
    The FITARA scorecard plays a very important role in 
providing insight into the progress agencies are making to 
enhance their cybersecurity. I will keep my remarks briefer 
than I would have, but there are a few things----
    Mr. Connolly. Yes, Mr. DeRusha, you will.
    Mr. DeRusha. Just really quick, though, sir. The reality 
facing day one of this administration was we were weeks into 
one of the most significant events that our Nation's faced in 
SolarWinds. We realized the status quo approach to 
cybersecurity had failed us, and so we issued Executive Order 
14028 to take some bold transformational actions there. Just a 
quick outline of that plan, and then I'll conclude my remarks.
    You know, our transformation plan includes making our 
systems more defensible by employing zero trust principles; 
meaning, we've got to move so that trust is never implicitly 
granted. It must be continuously evaluated.
    Across the Federal Government, we are replacing ineffective 
deterrents like passwords with multifactor authentication and 
encryption. We're also leveraging the same methods used by our 
adversaries to continuously identify risks to Federal systems, 
to--and leverage threat intelligence so that we can prioritize 
remediation of those risks. Finally, we're working to infuse 
security design practices across new technology throughout the 
supply chain.
    Just summarizing, much like that paradigm shift that we're 
working on in securing our networks, we've also begun to evolve 
how we measure success. So for Fiscal Year 2022, OMB and CISA 
have established a new baseline on FISMA metrics, many of which 
were selected around components of the EO. These data have been 
used to measure trends and work with agencies to identify areas 
where additional attention and resources are needed.
    So, I look forward today to discussing that and what we've 
released on performance.gov. I'll also look forward to the 
opportunity to testify today and take your questions.
    Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
    Ms. Harris.

STATEMENT OF CAROL C. HARRIS, DIRECTOR, INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
      AND CYBERSECURITY, GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

    Ms. Harris. I will keep my remarks brief.
    Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Hice, and members of the 
subcommittee, so we are here with the 15th iteration of the 
scorecard. It has just been a tremendous pleasure to work with 
you and your excellent staff as you continue, you know, your 
tremendous oversight of Federal IT issues.
    I do want to take this opportunity now to thank the 
dedicated staff at GAO who do the behind-the-scenes work in 
putting the scorecard together for you. I don't know if you 
know this, but there are about 15 to 17 staff that support this 
effort. My then-assistant director, Kevin Walsh, led the first 
11 iterations for you, and then Assistant Director Teresa Yost 
took over and has since led the last four.
    I want to thank Teresa and Kevin in particular for their 
tremendous leadership, as well as our team at GAO for just 
their excellent work over these past seven years.
    Now, just in terms of just--just very briefly, I did want 
to highlight a couple of things on the scorecard. So as you 
know, the overall grades for 17 agencies remain unchanged and 
have increased for seven. All 24 agencies have received a 
passing ``C'' or higher. And with Mr. Gray here, you'll see 
USAID remains the only one with an ``A.''
    I do want to say a couple of positive things. Incremental 
development still appears to be very strong, according to the 
scorecard. Roughly 90 percent of agencies' software projects 
are being developed to using these best practice techniques 
which are called for by FITARA.
    Another key positive mention is Portfolio Stat. The results 
of this effort have contributed to cost savings from moving the 
bar from $24.8 billion to $25.5 billion in cost savings and 
avoidances through Portfolio Stat. That is not insignificant. 
Again, I will reiterate, $25.5 billion is tremendous.
    In contrast, when you take a look at the scorecard, I did 
want to mention EIS. There are 19 agencies that have an ``F'' 
here because they failed to meet GSA's goal to fully get off of 
the legacy contracts by September 30 of this year. There are 
variations across those agencies. There are a few that are 
closer to the 100 percent goal, but there are 17 that are less 
than 80 percent complete. And agencies need to act with 
tremendous urgency to move the bar here and get off of those 
legacy contracts as quickly as possible.
    The legacy contracts are set to expire May 2023. GSA has 
already taken action to enable continuity of services through 
May 2024. We just don't want to have further delay because that 
is going to cause cost overruns. But the last transition was 
three years delayed and cost about $329 million in lost 
savings.
    Finally, I just want to mention cybersecurity grades. They 
are, again, based solely on the Fiscal Year 2021 IG 
assessments. This means that there is an absence of cyber CAP 
Goals yet again for this hearing. I raised it last hearing. 
This absence is very troubling. OMB needs to take steps to 
remediate this gap immediately. We need to have clear and 
measurable IT CAP Goals because it's the law.
    Finally, I just wanted to again mention my appreciation for 
working with you all these years. Thank you. I look forward to 
your questions, myself and Ms. Franks. Thank you.
    Mr. Connolly. Thank you so much.
    Ms. Franks, you don't have testimony?
    Ms. Franks. I do not.
    Mr. Connolly. OK.
    And, Mr. Gray, given the fact that others had a minute or 
two, I do want to give you that opportunity. We didn't mean to 
cut you off.
    Mr. Gray. OK. I'd be happy to start a little bit, if that's 
OK. Thank you.
    So, Chairman Connolly, Ranking Member Hice, members of the 
subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to testify today. USAID 
is grateful for your support, for our information technology 
innovation efforts, as well as our progress in complying with 
and integrating into the cultures the standards set out in 
FITARA.
    When asked about the evolution of FITARA and the scorecard, 
from my years of experience across Federal agencies and long 
tenures as CIO, the yearend is always a good time to look at 
the past, the present, and where we want to go for our future.
    In the past, the Federal IT environment was writhe with 
outdated IT infrastructure and little to no measurement or 
accountability of value for investment. The present environment 
shows the definitive impact that FITARA has had on improving 
critical technology modernization, security, and cost savings 
initiatives. Now, as the subcommittee looks toward the future 
of the scorecard, it will be important for agencies to look 
beyond FITARA as merely a grade and imbed FITARA holistically 
in the operational budget and performance structure of the 
entire agency.
    I have been honored to serve as the CIO for USAID for four 
months; and prior to that, at the Department of Education for 
six years; and prior to that, several technology management 
positions in both the private and public sector. These 
experiences have taught me that change is not only constant, 
can also be good. With change comes opportunity, experience, 
and expertise.
    I would like to offer a few suggestions to the subcommittee 
on how to adapt or change the scorecard in the categories for 
the future, and I promise I will be brief.
    For cyber, I would offer that there should be more than one 
metric, with all metrics aligning with the priorities Federal 
agencies are working on to better measure cybersecurity 
performance, and metrics should be regularly recalibrated to 
meet the evolving cyber landscape and reflect leading practices 
and standards of cybersecurity community.
    For cost savings, when we look at cost savings and 
avoidance, over a three-year period, those cost ratios are 
based on both development, modernization and enhancement, DME, 
and operations and maintenance, which is O&M. Agencies may be 
penalized in that calculation by the money they are spending on 
modernization efforts. The measurement would be more accurate 
from a cost savings ratio if only the O&M were used to show the 
savings on ``run the business.''
    And for DCOI, a better measure might be looking at the 
administrative and human capital burdens that are reduced, with 
fewer data centers mean fewer administrative overhead managing 
those data centers.
    USAID looks forward to the continued benefit the scorecard 
and its measurements have provided to Federal CIOs and the 
clearly defined priorities that help agencies deliver mission 
outcomes, provide excellent service, and effectively steward 
taxpayer dollars on behalf of the American people.
    I would like to thank Members of Congress, in particular 
members of this subcommittee for your continued leadership, 
interest, and support for our work. USAID looks forward to 
collaborating with you to address future challenges and new 
opportunities for reform.
    Thank you for your time. I look forward to your questions.
    Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
    The chair now calls on the distinguished gentlelady from 
Ohio, Shontel Brown, for her five minutes of questioning. 
Welcome.
    Ms. Brown. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    At our last FITARA hearing, we found bipartisan consensus 
on many things, including our disappointment with the 
administration's unwillingness to work with this subcommittee 
to provide meaningful and accurate data to score agencies' 
cybersecurity postures.
    Ten of the 24 agencies received a failing grade last time. 
I am happy to report that for the past six months, we have 
worked with the Office of Management and Budget and Dr. DeRusha 
to develop cybersecurity metrics for the scorecard. Today, we 
offer agencies and the public a preview of a new meaningful 
cybersecurity metric.
    So my question, Mr. DeRusha, can you explain the 
methodology behind these new cybersecurity metrics and why you 
think these are the correct metrics to incentivize agency best 
practices?
    Mr. DeRusha. Yes. Absolutely, Representative. I appreciate 
the question.
    So the metrics that we put up on performance.gov yesterday 
are a good representative sample of where we've been focused in 
EO implementation. So, for example, if you look in the protect 
category, we focused on four things there.
    One is ensuring we understand and are prioritizing risk as 
our adversaries look at our networks. We're talking about smart 
patching, which is using intelligence to prioritize our risk 
remediation.
    Second, we're looking at multifactor authentication. That 
is one of the most effective ways to keep our adversaries out 
when they are knocking on the door.
    And last, we focused on encryption. So if those defenses 
fail, you know, the harm is lessened or reduced to zero if 
you've got encryption in place.
    So for us, we've been really focused on ensuring that we're 
putting the most attention in understanding where there may be 
gaps in implementation and opportunities for new policy 
interventions.
    So, happy to continue to discuss our methodology beyond 
that, but those are the areas that I think deserve the most 
focus.
    Ms. Brown. Thank you very much.
    Mr. Gray, how do you interpret the new metrics? Do you see 
them as an accurate reflection of your agency's posture and 
that they point you in the right direction as you seek to keep 
your agency on top of evolving threats?
    The cybersecurity metric is unique on the scorecard by its 
nature, an effective approach to cybersecurity demands 
nimbleness and agility, an ability to predict and defend 
against evolving attacks and evermore determined adversaries. 
As a result, the scorecard cybersecurity metric has evolved 
over time using publicly available data to hold agencies 
accountable for making real progress in making their systems 
more secure. The need for transparency and access must be 
balanced against the legitimate need to protect sensitive data 
and information.
    Mr. Gray. Thank you for your question, Representative.
    Mr. Connolly. Mr. Gray, if you'll speak into the mic, 
closer. That's it.
    Mr. Gray. Sorry.
    Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
    Mr. Gray. Thank you for your--much better. Thank you for 
your question, Representative.
    So I have as even during my opening remarks commented about 
the need for additional metrics for cybersecurity, because the 
FISMA scores that we get every year are great, but they're 
dated. So I am certainly an advocate for more metrics in terms 
of capturing the cybersecurity risk that agencies are able to 
manage.
    So I think it's a good start. I know we've been briefed on 
it. Much like FITARA, I think--and look forward to it evolving 
over time. I know the CIO Council has been briefed on the 
metrics and the methodology.
    I would say that for the metrics that are captured in what 
I have seen, yes, it is accurate as it relates to those 
metrics. I do think that there needs to be more, and even OMB 
stated this when it was briefed to the CIO Council, that it's 
going to mature. So I look forward to working closely with OMB 
and the CIO Council to look for additional metrics that could 
be used to capture the holistic risk the agencies are managing 
every day.
    Ms. Brown. Thank you so much.
    Mr. DeRusha, the Russia--the administration has prioritized 
zero trust as a bold and fundamental strategy to secure Federal 
information technology systems. Can you speak more to what a 
zero trust strategy involves and how this approach has been 
incorporated into the scorecard metrics?
    Mr. DeRusha. Yes. Absolutely, Representative. So our zero 
trust strategy's been based on extensive coordination with the 
private sector. This is essentially a security modernization 
strategy. What we learned in events like SolarWinds is that the 
old approach to being able to rely on our network boundaries as 
the perimeter of trust and then once you are vetted and in you 
can access resources freely, no longer works.
    So what we're talking about here is focusing on a new 
approach to identity access management and control, and so that 
we are validating every user and device every time it tries to 
access a resource, to ensure that they are who they say they 
are, or the device is safe to operate in that environment. So 
it is really based around that and a number of other 
fundamental capabilities to ensure quicker detection of 
adversary activity.
    Mr. Connolly. Thank you. And thank you so much, Ms. Brown.
    Ms. Brown. Thank you.
    Mr. Connolly. By the way, Mr. Gray, if I were getting an 
``A'', I would say the metrics are perfect, don't change a 
thing. But good for you in saying no, it's got to evolve.
    The distinguished ranking member, Mr. Hice, is recognized 
for his round of questioning.
    Mr. Hice. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
    You know, the metrics have changed, but really nothing has 
changed. That's what's kind of disturbing to me. The data used 
to compute this scorecard was the same data that was used last 
year, and really nothing changed but the grade. And because--so 
a little more weighted approach to scoring.
    For example, last year, the EPA got a ``D.'' This time it 
got a ``C'', but nothing has changed; just the way we score. So 
we're not getting anywhere. We may pat ourselves on the 
shoulder and say, hey, we got better grades. But we don't have 
better grades, we just have a different way of grading, and 
nothing has changed from last year. That's disturbing to me.
    Mr. DeRusha, let me ask you this. And we do have your 
written testimony and have looked through it. In there you 
mentioned 20 references to the President's executive order on 
cybersecurity but no references to the Cross-Agency Priority 
Goals. So this is, likewise, a bit confusing to me.
    Is this administration, in your opinion, prioritizing an 
executive order over the Federal law that requires CAP Goals, 
No. 1? And No. 2, what is Congress supposed to do with this? 
Are we supposed to now prioritize an executive order over 
Federal law?
    Mr. DeRusha. So, Ranking Member, appreciate the question. 
The answer is they are both important. OMB's position is that 
we are complying with the law, and we made a decision to weave 
IT and cybersecurity throughout the President's Management 
Agenda and several CAP Goals. We had a very aggressive 
executive order which we needed to measure our progress on. So 
we repurposed our FISMA metrics to really align with all of the 
goals and objectives that we've laid out there. For example, 
OMB has issued nine memoranda, nine cybersecurity policy 
memoranda, since the order was issued.
    So we're very active and busy here. And there's just a 
whole body of work that we feel needs to be managed through 
that other process. But they are both extremely important.
    Mr. Hice. Well, if they're both extremely important, why 
didn't you even mention CAP Goals? Why did you mention the 
executive order 20 times but not a single mention of the 
responsibility of Federal law?
    I mean, this is backward to me. Just because there's an 
executive order does not give you nor anybody else the right to 
ignore Federal law, including the administration. It's time 
this stuff gets cleared up. The law is the law and it means 
something. It does not mean that we can ignore it.
    I would think the chairman shares my frustration with this. 
The law is significant. It's the law, for crying out loud. Even 
in your own written statement, you ignored it and placed 
priority on emphasizing the executive order.
    Let me--instead of the law--let me ask you this. You are 
now wearing two hats, the National Cyber Director and the chief 
information security officer. The NCD, relatively new, which, 
in fairness, I voted against it because it's confusing to me. 
It's like, what is it going to do? What is it supposed to do? 
And that was never clear to me. It's still not clear to me.
    So if you could, in the two hats--the dual hats that you're 
wearing, explain what's the different between these two 
positions.
    Mr. DeRusha. So, Representative, my experience of being the 
first Deputy National Cyber Director, dual-hatted also as the 
Federal CISO, is that it's worked really well. Look, the Office 
of National Cyber Director is a brand-new organization. I think 
it's going to add a ton of value over a long term. Already 
we've seen it. You know, the office has grown to almost 75 
people, and we're out there coordinating, communicating with 
the entire Nation and really getting everybody on the same 
consistent path toward, you know, modernization agenda.
    So for me, being one foot in both organizations just 
ensures that we are congruent in all of our policy directions, 
so you don't have, you know, separate officials making 
different decisions. What that decision made was just kind of 
ensure that----
    Mr. Hice. So which one is involved in policy?
    Mr. DeRusha. Well, I'm the same person, so they're both 
involved in policy in the end. But, you know, OMB generally 
still issues the policy memorandum per FISMA 2014 authorities, 
and we're just ensuring that Office of National Cyber Director 
staff are always aligned and supportive.
    Mr. Hice. So is one more leaning toward policy and strategy 
or whatever, and the other more involved in enforcement, if you 
will, of the policies, or what----
    Mr. DeRusha. I would describe the No. 1 benefit of being in 
the NCD organization is that I'm aligned to and part of the 
entire organization's daily activities, so that I can stay 
apprised of where the entire strategic decisions are being made 
for the whole office and then bring that into everything that 
we're doing for Federal. So I--you know, that's kind of how I 
would just draw the distinction.
    Mr. Hice. OK. My time has expired. It's still unclear to 
me.
    Thank you. I yield.
    Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Hice.
    The chair recognizes himself.
    Mr. Gray, I know you've only been there four months, but 
you've got a perspective having come from a previous agency. I 
guess I'd invite you to talk a little bit about, how did AID do 
it?
    I remember when AID got a low grade, and now you're kind of 
the archetype of how to do it and get an ``A''. So can you 
share with us a little bit your observation of what were the 
elements, management elements, resources deployed, personnel 
decisions, policy decisions, that went into AID taking a 
different direction and consciously so?
    Mr. Gray. Thank you for the question, Mr. Chairman. I would 
say that, while it has only been four months, I have certainly 
been on this FITARA journey for a number of years. The embrace 
by the agency of FITARA in totality--I have only been there 
four months, but there is not one week that goes by where 
FITARA is not referenced in one meeting or another. Focusing on 
cybersecurity or governance or modernization and the key 
tenants of FITARA has been fully embraced. Policy has driven 
it. Senior leadership's involvement has driven it. Resources 
being applied toward complying with and making sure that we are 
leading FITARA in implementing to really ensure that we're 
making better informed decisions.
    I look at FITARA in a way like a navigational roadmap for a 
CIO, that you know where those critical landmarks are that keep 
you on track. And as it has evolved, those landmarks become 
clearer and we can measure month over month, day over day, year 
over year, to see, are we making it toward that goal.
    So from what I have seen in the time is the full embrace of 
FITARA, it's not just a compliance activity. The outcome is 
better informed decisions, better management in terms of 
resources, and that's funding in individuals, and applying 
those resources to the appropriate projects and activities that 
are going to lead us to the future. That's what I would 
attribute.
    The team has been phenomenal. I will share, and I was 
sharing earlier, that inheriting the team is just amazing. It's 
a phenomenal team that's fully embraced it, supported it, and 
is a hundred percent behind it, Congressman.
    Mr. Connolly. And obviously, for that to be successful the 
way you describe it, also requires the leadership to be fully 
onboard?
    Mr. Gray. Yes, Mr. Chairman. Absolutely.
    Mr. Connolly. Have you found that other agencies are 
approaching AID to say, how did you do it? I mean, is there 
some cross-fertilization going on? Is there curiosity, if not a 
desire to emulate, what AID has achieved in other agencies of 
the Federal Government?
    Mr. Gray. Well, I couldn't say that; I've been there such a 
short period of time. I will tell you that at the Federal CIO 
Council, there's a lot of conversations specifically on lessons 
learned and best practices and how do we do this and how did 
you do that, which even myself coming in new, there were a lot 
of questions that I had of, how did you tackle this, and what 
was a really good way to manage this component or this part of 
FITARA.
    Mr. Connolly. Well, I guess I would urge you to document 
it. I mean, let's capture it and share it with other agencies, 
because you are a model. And while we want to talk about other 
metrics we may want to capture in a future scorecard, we don't 
want to lose the metrics we've got now and what they've 
accomplished. And you are an example of that.
    Ms. Harris, did you want to comment on that from GAO's 
perspective, specifically about what AID has--the 
transformation they've gone through? And from your observation, 
how do they do it and why are they so successful, and can 
others emulate?
    Ms. Harris. Well, I think Mr. Gray covered it very well. I 
think because they live and breathe FITARA and they have fully 
embraced it and they have executive leadership at the top that 
is fully promoting the important tenets of FITARA, that has 
made all the difference. And when you compare the agencies that 
are not doing as well as USAID, that is one of the key factors 
as to why, plain and simple.
    Mr. Connolly. Just calling it Connolly Issa just is so much 
easier than FITARA, but all right. That's a different subject.
    Thank you. My time has expired.
    Mr. Clyde, you are recognized for your line of questioning.
    Mr. Clyde. Thank you. Thank you.
    I'm going to start off with a question regarding the new 
metric. And we'll go to GAO, Ms. Harris and Ms. Franks, in that 
order, if you don't mind.
    What is your perspective on this new metric?
    Ms. Harris. Well, I'm going to let Ms. Franks talk about 
the new metric.
    Mr. Clyde. All right.
    Ms. Harris. But what I do want to go back to is the 
existing metric right now for cybersecurity is incomplete. It's 
not a perfect metric. It is not intended to measure cyber 
comprehensively. I think Mr. Gray is probably on to it, where 
you're going to have to have multiple metrics to give that 
holistic picture. But I think what's important is that these 
CAP Goals need to be addressed because it is the law. And 
having IT weaved into existing CAP Goals as an enabler is a 
great thing, but it is not what the law says. Real property and 
IT need to have standalone CAP Goals because these are 
longstanding IT management issues.
    So I'm going to just mention that, but Ms. Franks will talk 
about the new metrics.
    Mr. Clyde. Ms. Franks?
    Ms. Franks. Yes. I agree with Mr. Gray and Ms. Harris. So 
the metrics are not as comprehensive as one would think they 
need to be. So for an issue as complex and dynamic as 
cybersecurity, using a few selected measures cannot really just 
give us a holistic picture of what is going to be needed to 
really substantially paint this picture of what's going to be 
needed to fully and comprehensive give us what the Federal 
Government needs to fully comply with the evolving cyber 
threats across the Federal Government, the sophisticated 
evolving events that plague us day in and day out.
    So, what's going to be needed from these metrics is for 
OMB's guidance to give us that automated approach to really 
staying abreast of the cyber curve and really helping us to 
really fundamentally give us some up-to-date metrics. The smart 
patching, the multifactor authentication, the event logging, 
all of those are going to help us, but we really are going to 
need some metrics that are going to help all of the agencies 
with where they are.
    All of the agencies' missions are different. They're 
fundamentally designed different. They're federated. They're 
just going to have to be designed differently for every single 
agency.
    Mr. Clyde. OK. Thank you very much.
    Mr. Gray, USAID's cyber grade went from a ``B'' in the 
FITARA 14 scorecard to an ``A'' in today's scorecard. The 
improved grade reflects a change in the methodology as the 
scores in this scorecard are based on a weighted average. 
Consequently, the four attained by USAID, which was a ``B'' in 
the 114th scorecard is now presented as an ``A'' in this 
scorecard, as I see it. So I'm concerned that this appears to 
be simply a lowering of standards to show better results.
    Do you see it this way too? Or if not, please explain.
    Mr. Gray. Thank you for the question, Representative. I 
think more work needs to be done, to be honest. I am so new to 
the agency, that I would be hesitant to respond specifically to 
the changes that have happened since last year and this year 
because it's only been four months. But I will say that the--
there's a lot of activities that agencies are doing to manage 
risk that are not captured in a FISMA audit or even an 
additional cyber score, which really gets to my earlier point 
is that we capture a lot of data and look forward to working 
across government to figure out what is the right data to 
present the holistic risk associated with each agencies' 
portfolio.
    So, I do think it's a great start. Much like I said 
earlier, the evolution of it is--and the maturation of it is 
really where we need to go so that we can truly represent the 
totality of what the metrics are showing us, because I have 
tons of metrics on a bunch of different activities that, in my 
view, is rather consistent across agencies. So----
    Mr. Clyde. OK. Well, thank you.
    Mr. Chairman, I would like to take a moment of personal 
privilege in this last minute I have or so, and I want to thank 
my good friend and colleague, Congressman Jody Hice, for his 
leadership on this committee, as today is his last subcommittee 
hearing on Government Operations.
    He's done an incredible job leading Republicans on this 
crucial subcommittee, and particularly the past two years 
during the Biden administration. Congressman Hice has stood for 
truth and conservative values. He's been a warrior in the fight 
for smaller and more accountable government. He's been a 
colleague of mine, and he has been my mentor.
    Thank you.
    Congressman Hice, you will be deeply missed, and you will 
leave very large shoes to fill. So thank you very much for your 
being here and your leadership, Congressman.
    Mr. Hice. Well, thank you for those kind words, my dear 
friend. I deeply appreciate that. Thank you.
    Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Clyde. I certainly share your 
sentiments.
    And before I call on Ms. Norton who's been so patient and 
kind, I want to thank my subcommittee staff for several years 
of extraordinary output. This subcommittee has had the most 
hearings of any subcommittee on the Oversight and Reform 
Committee. We've written the most letters. We've produced the 
most bills, by far, and that couldn't happen without capable, 
wonderful staff.
    I want to thank Wendy Ginsberg, staff director; Annaliese 
Yukawa, my legislative assistant for this committee; Brian 
Maney, who is on loan to us as a fellow; and Asher Moss from 
Wesleyan University, who is interning with us. Of course, 
there've been people who've gone before who have done wonderful 
work.
    I also want to thank Bill Womack and the Republican staff 
for usually their cooperation. Bill and I go way back to his 
former boss, and Tom Davis, who was the former chairman of this 
committee. I succeeded him in the 11th District of Virginia, 
and some day I hope to succeed him as chairman of the 
committee. But that's a different subject too.
    I also want to thank Aidan Miller who is here with us 
today, who also worked in my office.
    So, thank you all very much for wonderful efforts.
    We're going to continue next year in the minority, 
hopefully temporarily, and hopefully we'll continue the 
tradition of this subcommittee in terms of bipartisan 
cooperation on this subject area. I've worked with Will Hurd; 
I've worked with Todd Platts; I've worked with Mark Meadows; 
I've worked with Jody Hice. We've got a long bipartisan 
tradition when it comes to trying to modernize IT and the 
Federal Government. And indeed, FITARA was co-written with 
Darrell Issa, also chairman of this committee, Republican 
chairman of this committee. So we want to keep that tradition.
    We want to make sure that we are monitoring and setting the 
right metrics for progress to serve--better serve the American 
people and to make sure that we are cyber secure. And your 
input and your experience are really important. That's why we 
have these oversight hearings, not only to score people but to 
try to nudge them toward that progress that AID has been able 
to succeed at.
    With that, the gentlelady, the Congresswoman from the 
District of Columbia, Eleanor Holmes Norton, is recognized for 
her round of questioning. Welcome, Delegate Norton.
    Eleanor, you're muted.
    Ms. Norton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. May I also applaud the 
extraordinary role you have played as chair on this committee.
    And let me ask Mr. Gray a question. Mr. Gray, FITARA will 
require CIOs, and here I'm quoting, to have a significant role 
in the decisions, processes and management, governance and 
oversight process related to information technology, end quote.
    Since the subcommittee added a CIO reporting authority 
metric on the scorecard, the percentage of CIOs with a direct 
or partial reporting relationship rose from 50 percent to over 
90 percent. CIOs have previously testified to how helpful 
FITARA was at giving them a spot in the C-suite conversations.
    So, Mr. Gray, as a member of the Federal CIO Council, you 
have seen the transition firsthand. What are the benefits of 
having a direct reporting relationship to your agency head?
    Mr. Gray. Thank you for the question, Representative. I 
absolutely support the CIO reporting to the agency head for 
numerous reasons. For example--and I have been fortunate enough 
to hold this role in two agencies that reported directly to the 
agency head--the value is not just having a seat at the table, 
but it is ensuring that I am able, or this position is able to 
brief senior leadership on how are things going from a 
cybersecurity standpoint. How are things going from a 
government standpoint? How are operations going? How are we 
modernizing? What are we doing for user experience and customer 
satisfaction? How is the work force doing? And it gives that 
direct feed to agency leadership, so when they are needing to 
make decisions across the entire agency that go beyond 
technology, that they have that critical information to inform 
those decisions.
    So it has been instrumental to ensure that I am able to 
give regular updates so that the agency head is informed and 
making the best decisions with the information that's available 
at the time.
    Ms. Norton. Well, thank you.
    Now, Ms. Harris, Federal CIOs have a seat in the boardroom 
but may not have a voice in--at the decisionmaking table. So 
considering all this progress for Scorecard 15.0, the 
subcommittee is reviewing an evolution of this category to 
include additional metrics on the CIOs' influence on IT budget 
and acquiescing decisions.
    So, Ms. Harris, GAO requested a report in the 2018 Federal 
chief information--on the Federal chief information officers. 
Could you briefly describe the results of that report?
    Ms. Harris. Yes, ma'am. So the bottom line of the report is 
that none of the 24 agencies had policies that fully addressed 
the role of the CIO consistent with Federal laws and other 
guidance.
    So there are roughly six areas of responsibility for CIOs. 
They include things like IT strategic planning, the IT work 
force, as well as IT budgeting, just to name a few. The 
agencies told us that CIOs are implementing the 
responsibilities in these areas even when they are not required 
by policy, but in our surveys to the CIOs, all of them 
acknowledged that they were not always very effective in 
implementing in those six areas. So there's a linkage of how 
critical it is to have it in policy at the agency, the impact, 
to empower these CIOs.
    Right now, there are eight of the 24 agencies that have 
since addressed those policy gaps. So there are still 16 that 
continue to have gaps. We also made recommendations to OMB to 
provide additional guidance related to CIO authorities relative 
to the IT work force, as well as to providing a complete 
definition of the authority that CIOs should have relative to 
the IT spend.
    So these recommendations remain open. That means that there 
is still work that needs to be done to fully empower CIOs. It 
is great that they have that seat at the table, they have that 
direct line reporting to the head of their--of the agencies, 
but there are still additional responsibilities that they carry 
that need to be fully flushed out. So I am very pleased to see 
this category in the scorecard expanded to address some of 
those areas.
    Ms. Norton. Thank you. I see my time has expired.
    Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Ms. Norton. And thank you for 
making yourself available to chair the hearing, although it 
looks like we may not need to do that. But thank you so much 
for always being gracious with your time.
    Let me followup on the last question just real briefly, Ms. 
Harris. At our last scorecard hearing, I believe we had some 
problems with OMB getting data to us, which then distorted 
scores for agencies. Has that issue been addressed?
    Ms. Harris. Are you referring to the cybersecurity scores?
    Mr. Connolly. I believe it was, but the issue was OMB 
sitting on--either sitting on that or not providing it to the 
committee.
    Ms. Harris. That's correct. The OMB did not provide that 
publicly as they are expected to do so. It's unclear to me 
whether they are sitting on that information or whether they 
just don't have that information. The main issue at hand is 
that there are, at this time, no specific IT CAP Goals. That is 
clearly and distinctly in the law, that they should have 
distinct IT CAP Goals as well as real property goals, and at 
this time, we don't see that coming out.
    Mr. Connolly. Mr. DeRusha, both Mr. Hice and now Ms. Harris 
have--have reminded us all, it's in the law. So can you address 
that issue on behalf of OMB?
    Mr. DeRusha. Chairman, I can. OMB----
    Mr. Connolly. Did you say I can?
    Mr. DeRusha. I can, sir.
    Mr. Connolly. All right.
    Mr. DeRusha. OMB's perspective is that we are complying 
with the law. If you look at the CAP Goals that we have woven 
IT throughout, they're all focused on digital delivery, right, 
and they've got security principles and the best of IT 
delivery, digital delivery principles embedded throughout. So I 
think we do feel we have that.
    But the important thing to us is that, again, I said nine--
nine policies we've issued. I mean, there's been a huge 
emphasis in body of work. Yesterday we released the performance 
metrics on performance.gov for cybersecurity. We are very open 
to continuing to evolve those. That is our plan. We've adjusted 
some of our metrics for 2023. We're open to continuing 
conversations with the committee on other focus areas.
    So, you know, our view is that it's important that we've 
got the metrics out in public, and we're going to continue to 
evolve this as we go.
    Mr. Connolly. So at our next--I don't think GAO is 
satisfied with that answer.
    Mr. Hice. No, neither am I.
    Ms. Harris. Mr. Chairman, if I may?
    Mr. Connolly. Neither is Mr. Hice.
    Ms. Harris.
    Ms. Harris. The law clearly states that these IT CAP Goals 
need to be standalone in order to address these longstanding IT 
management challenges that we face. It's a great thing that OMB 
has infused and weaved technology into these other CAP Goals to 
use IT as an enabler for, for example, customer experience. All 
for that. But it's not--and digital delivery. But it is not 
addressing these longstanding issues that we have had with IT 
relative to cybersecurity and IT management.
    Mr. Connolly. OK.
    Mr. Hice. Mr. Chairman, if I could just add.
    Mr. DeRusha, just remember you are sworn in under 
testimony. And to say that you are abiding by the law, I would 
be very, very careful, because you probably are alone in that 
opinion.
    Mr. Connolly. I would simply say, we--by the time we have 
our next FITARA hearing, hopefully, Mr. DeRusha, OMB, and 
hopefully Ms. Harris, GAO, can reconcile these approaches and 
make sure they're constant with the law. And the end goal here 
is to be able accurately to measure progress, and that's why 
it's in the law, and so we want to make sure that works. So we 
thank you for that.
    Mr. Hice, anything more for the record?
    Mr. Hice. I'm good. Thank you.
    Mr. Connolly. Really?
    Mr. Hice. Yes, sir.
    Mr. Connolly. All right. Let the record show he's good.
    At any rate, I wish everyone happy holidays. Thank you so 
much for coming to our 15th hearing on OMB, and I assure you--I 
mean, excuse me, on FITARA, and I assure you, it will not be 
our last. Happy holidays, everyone.
    We are adjourned.
    [Whereupon, at 11:51 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

                                 [all]

